
There was once a woman who had three daughters, of whom the eldest was
named "One Eye," because she had only one eye in the middle of her
forehead. The second had two eyes, like other people, and she was called
"Two Eyes." The youngest had three eyes, two like her second sister, and
one in the middle of her forehead, like the eldest, and she bore the
name of "Three Eyes."

Now because little Two Eyes looked just like other people, her mother
and sisters could not endure her. They said to her, "You are not better
than common folks, with your two eyes; you don't belong to us."

So they pushed her about, and threw all their old clothes to her for her
to wear, and gave her only the pieces that were left to eat, and did
everything that they could to make her miserable. It so happened that
little Two Eyes was sent into the fields to take care of the goats, and
she was often very hungry, although her sisters had as much as they
liked to eat. So one day she seated herself on a mound in the field, and
began to weep and cry so bitterly that two little rivulets flowed from
her eyes. Once, in the midst of her sorrow she looked up, and saw a
woman standing near her who said, "What are you weeping for, little Two
Eyes?"

"I cannot help weeping," she replied; "for because I have two eyes, like
other people, my mother and sisters cannot bear me; they push me about
from one corner to another and make we wear their old clothes, and give
me nothing to eat but what is left, so that I am always hungry. To-day
they gave me so little that I am nearly starved."

"Dry up your tears, little Two Eyes," said the wise woman; "I will tell
you something to do which will prevent you from ever being hungry again.
You have only to say to your own goat:

  "'Little goat, if you're able,
  Pray deck out my table,'

"and immediately there will be a pretty little table before you full of
all sorts of good things for you to eat, as much as you like. And when
you have had enough, and you do not want the table any more, you need
only say:

  "'Little goat, when you're able,
  Remove my nice table,'

"and it will vanish from your eyes."

Then the wise woman went away. "Now," thought little Two Eyes, "I will
try if what she says is true, for I am very hungry," so she said:

  "Little goat, if you're able,
  Pray deck out my table."

The words were scarcely spoken, when a beautiful little table stood
really before her; it had a white cloth and plates, and knives and
forks, and silver spoons, and such a delicious dinner, smoking hot as if
it had just come from the kitchen. Then little Two Eyes sat down and
said the shortest grace she knew--"Pray God be our guest for all time.
Amen"--before she allowed herself to taste anything. But oh, how she did
enjoy her dinner! and when she had finished, she said, as the wise woman
had taught her:

  "Little goat, when you're able,
  Remove my nice table."

In a moment, the table and everything upon it had disappeared. "That is
a pleasant way to keep house," said little Two Eyes, and felt quite
contented and happy. In the evening, when she went home with the goat,
she found an earthenware dish with some scraps which her sisters had
left for her, but she did not touch them. The next morning she went away
with the goat, leaving them behind where they had been placed for her.
The first and second times that she did so, the sisters did not notice
it; but when they found it happened every day, they said one to the
other, "There is something strange about little Two Eyes, she leaves her
supper every day, and all that has been put for her has been wasted; she
must get food somewhere else."

So they determined to find out the truth, and they arranged that when
Two Eyes took her goat to the field, One Eye should go with her to take
particular notice of what she did, and discover if anything was brought
for her to eat and drink.

So when Two Eyes started with her goat, One Eye said to her, "I am going
with you to-day to see if the goat gets her food properly while you are
watching the rest."

But Two Eyes knew what she had in her mind. So she drove the goat into
the long grass, and said, "Come, One Eye, let us sit down here and rest,
and I will sing to you."

One Eye seated herself, and, not being accustomed to walk so far, or to
be out in the heat of the sun, she began to feel tired, and as little
Two Eyes kept on singing, she closed her one eye and fell fast asleep.

When Two Eyes saw this, she knew that One Eye could not betray her, so
she said:

  "Little goat, if you are able,
  Come and deck my pretty table."

She seated herself when it appeared, and ate and drank very quickly, and
when she had finished she said:

  "Little goat, when you are able,
  Come and clear away my table."

It vanished in the twinkling of an eye; and then Two Eyes woke up One
Eye, and said, "Little One Eye, you are a clever one to watch goats;
for, while you are asleep, they might be running all over the world.
Come, let us go home!"

So they went to the house, and little Two Eyes again left the scraps on
the dish untouched, and One Eye could not tell her mother whether little
Two Eyes had eaten anything in the field; for she said to excuse
herself, "I was asleep."

The next day the mother said to Three Eyes, "You must go to the field
this time, and find out whether there is anyone who brings food to
little Two Eyes; for she must eat and drink secretly."

So when little Two Eyes started with her goat, Three Eyes followed, and
said, "I am going with you to-day, to see if the goats are properly fed
and watched."

But Two Eyes knew her thoughts; so she led the goat through the long
grass to tire Three Eyes, and at last she said, "Let us sit down here
and rest, and I will sing to you, Three Eyes."

She was glad to sit down, for the walk and the heat of the sun had
really tired her; and, as her sister continued her song, she was obliged
to close two of her eyes, and they slept, but not the third. In fact,
Three Eyes was wide awake with one eye, and heard and saw all that Two
Eyes did; for poor little Two Eyes, thinking she was asleep, said her
speech to the goat, and the table came with all the good things on it,
and was carried away when Two Eyes had eaten enough; and the cunning
Three Eyes saw it all with her one eye. But she pretended to be asleep
when her sister came to wake her and told her she was going home.

That evening, when little Two Eyes again left the supper they placed
aside for her, Three Eyes said to her mother, "I know where the proud
thing gets her good eating and drinking;" and then she described all she
had seen in the field. "I saw it all with one eye," she said; "for she
had made my other two eyes close with her fine singing, but luckily the
one in my forehead remained open."

Then the envious mother cried out to poor little Two Eyes, "You wish to
have better food than we, do you? You shall lose your wish!" She took up
a butcher's knife, went out, and stuck the good little goat in the
heart, and it fell dead.

When little Two Eyes saw this, she went out into the field, seated
herself on a mound, and wept most bitter tears.

Presently the wise woman stood again before her, and said, "Little Two
Eyes, why do you weep?"

"Ah!" she replied, "I must weep. The goat, who every day spread my table
so beautifully, has been killed by my mother, and I shall have again to
suffer from hunger and sorrow."

"Little Two Eyes," said the wise woman, "I will give you some good
advice. Go home, and ask your sister to give you the inside of the
slaughtered goat, and then go and bury it in the ground in front of the
house-door."

On saying this the wise woman vanished.

Little Two Eyes went home quickly, and said to her sister, "Dear sister,
give me some part of my poor goat. I don't want anything valuable; only
give me the inside."

Her sister laughed, and said, "Of course you can have that, if you don't
want anything else."

So little Two Eyes took the inside; and in the evening, when all was
quiet, buried it in the ground outside the house-door, as the wise woman
had told her to do.

The next morning, when they all rose and looked out of the window, there
stood a most wonderful tree, with leaves of silver and apples of gold
hanging between them. Nothing in the wide world could be more beautiful
or more costly. They none of them knew how the tree could come there in
one night, excepting little Two Eyes. She supposed it had grown up from
the inside of the goat; for it stood over where she had buried it in the
earth.

Then said the mother to little One Eye, "Climb up, my child, and break
off some of the fruit from the tree."

One Eye climbed up, but when she tried to catch a branch and pluck one
of the apples, it escaped from her hand, and so it happened every time
she made the attempt, and, do what she would, she could not reach one.

"Three Eyes," said the mother, "climb up, and try what you can do;
perhaps you will be able to see better with your three eyes than One Eye
can."

One Eye slid down from the tree, and Three Eyes climbed up. But Three
Eyes was not more skilful; with all her efforts she could not draw the
branches, nor the fruit, near enough to pluck even a leaf, for they
sprang back as she put out her hand.

At last the mother was impatient, and climbed up herself, but with no
more success, for, as she appeared to grasp a branch, or fruit, her hand
closed upon thin air.

"May I try?" said little Two Eyes; "perhaps I may succeed."

"You, indeed!" cried her sisters; "you, with your two eyes, what can you
do?"

But Two Eyes climbed up, and the golden apples did not fly back from her
when she touched them, but almost laid themselves on her hand, and she
plucked them one after another, till she carried down her own little
apron full.

The mother took them from her, and gave them to her sisters, as she said
little Two Eyes did not handle them properly; but this was only from
jealousy, because little Two Eyes was the only one who could reach the
fruit, and she went into the house feeling more spiteful to her than
ever.

It happened that while all three sisters were standing under the tree
together a young knight rode by. "Run away, quick, and hide yourself,
little Two Eyes; hide yourself somewhere, for we shall be quite ashamed
for you to be seen." Then they pushed the poor girl, in great haste,
under an empty cask, which stood near the tree, and several of the
golden apples that she had plucked along with her.

As the knight came nearer they saw he was a handsome man; and presently
he halted, and looked with wonder and pleasure at the beautiful tree
with its silver leaves and golden fruit.

At last he spoke to the sisters, and asked: "To whom does this beautiful
tree belong? If a man possessed only one branch he might obtain all he
wished for in the world."

"This tree belongs to us," said the two sisters, "and we will break off
a branch for you if you like." They gave themselves a great deal of
trouble in trying to do as they offered; but all to no purpose, for the
branches and the fruit evaded their efforts, and sprung back at every
touch.

"This is wonderful," exclaimed the knight, "that the tree should belong
to you, and yet you are not able to gather even a branch."

They persisted, however, in declaring that the tree was their own
property. At this moment little Two Eyes, who was angry because her
sisters had not told the truth, caused two of the golden apples to slip
out from under the cask, and they rolled on till they reached the feet
of the knight's horse. When he saw them, he asked in astonishment where
they came from.

The two ugly maidens replied that they had another sister, but they
dared not let him see her, for she had only two eyes, like common
people, and was named little Two Eyes.

But the knight felt very anxious to see her, and called out, "Little Two
Eyes, come here." Then came Two Eyes, quite comforted, from the empty
cask, and the knight was astonished to find her so beautiful.

Then he said, "Little Two Eyes, can you break off a branch of the tree
for me?"

"Oh yes," she replied, "I can, very easily, for the tree belongs to me."
And she climbed up, and, without any trouble, broke off a branch with
its silver leaves and golden fruit and gave it to the knight.

He looked down at her as she stood by his horse, and said: "Little Two
Eyes, what shall I give you for this?"

"Ah!" she answered, "I suffer from hunger and thirst, and sorrow, and
trouble, from early morning till late at night; if you would only take
me with you, and release me, I should be so happy."

Then the knight lifted the little maiden on his horse, and rode home
with her to his father's castle. There she was given beautiful clothes
to wear, and as much to eat and drink as she wished, and as she grew up
the young knight loved her so dearly that they were married with great
rejoicings.

Now, when the two sisters saw little Two Eyes carried away by the
handsome young knight, they were overjoyed at their good fortune. "The
wonderful tree belongs to us now," they said; "even if we cannot break
off a branch, yet everybody who passes will stop to admire it, and make
acquaintance with us, and, who knows? we may get husbands after all."

But when they rose the next morning, lo! the tree had vanished, and with
it all their hopes. And on this very morning, when little Two Eyes
looked out of her chamber window of the castle, she saw, to her great
joy, that the tree had followed her.

Little Two Eyes lived for a long time in great happiness; but she heard
nothing of her sisters, till one day two poor women came to the castle,
to beg for alms. Little Two Eyes saw them, and, looking earnestly in
their faces, she recognised her two sisters, who had become so poor that
they were obliged to beg their bread from door to door.

But the good sister received them most kindly, and promised to take care
of them and give them all they wanted. And then they did indeed repent
and feel sorry for having treated her so badly in their youthful days.




CHAPTER II

THE MAGIC MIRROR


One day in the middle of winter, when the snowflakes fell from the sky
like feathers, a queen sat at a window netting. Her netting-needle was
of black ebony, and as she worked, and the snow glittered, she pricked
her finger, and three drops of blood fell into the snow. The red spots
looked so beautiful in the white snow that the queen thought to herself:
"Oh, if I only had a little child, I should like it to be as fair as
snow, as rosy as the red blood, and with hair and eyes as black as
ebony."

Very soon after this the queen had a little daughter who was very fair,
had rosy cheeks, and hair as black as ebony; and they gave her the name
of Snow-white. But at the birth of the little child the queen died.

When Snow-white was a year old, the king took another wife. She was very
handsome, but so proud and vain that she could not endure that anyone
should surpass her in beauty. She possessed a wonderful mirror, and when
she stood before it to look at herself she would say:

    "Mirror, mirror on the wall,
     Am I most beautiful of all?"

Then the mirror would reply:

  "Young queen, thou are so wondrous fair,
   None can with thee at all compare."

Then she would go away quite contented, for she knew the magic mirror
could speak only the truth.

Years went by, and as Snow-white grew up, she became day after day more
beautiful, till she reached the age of seven years, and then people
began to talk about her, and say that she would be more lovely even than
the queen herself. So the proud woman went to her magic looking-glass,
and asked:

    "Mirror, mirror on the wall,
     Am I most beautiful of all?"

But the mirror answered:

  "Queen, thou are lovely still to see,
   But Snow-white will be
   A thousand times more beautiful than thee."

Then the queen was terrified, and turned green and yellow with jealousy.
If she had caught sight of Snow-white at that moment, she would have
been ready to tear her heart out of her body, she hated the maiden so
fiercely.

And this jealousy and envy grew every day stronger and stronger in her
heart, like a disease, till she had no rest day or night.

At last she sent for a hunter, who lived near a forest, and said to him,
"Hunter, I want to get rid of that child. Take her out into the wood,
and if you bring me some proofs that she is dead, I will reward you
handsomely. Never let her appear before my eyes again."

So the hunter enticed the child into the wood; but when he took out his
hunting-knife to thrust into Snow-white's innocent heart, she fell on
her knees and wept, and said, "Ah, dear hunter, leave me my life; I will
run away into the wild wood, and never, never come home any more."

She looked so innocent and beautiful as she knelt, that the hunter's
heart was moved with compassion: "Run away, then, thou poor child," he
cried; "I cannot harm thee."

Snow-white thanked him so sweetly, and was out of sight in a few
moments.

"She will be devoured by wild beasts," he said to himself. But the
thought that he had not killed her was as if a stone-weight had been
lifted from his heart.

To satisfy the queen, he took part of the inside of a young fawn, which
the wicked woman thought was poor little Snow-white, and was overjoyed
to think she was dead.

But the poor little motherless child, when she found herself alone in
the wood, and saw nothing but trees and leaves, was dreadfully
frightened, and knew not what to do. At last she began to run over the
sharp stones and through the thorns, and though the wild beasts sprang
out before her, they did her no harm. She ran on as long as she could
till her little feet became quite sore; and towards evening she saw, to
her great joy, a pretty little house. So she went up to it, and found
the door open and no one at home.

It was a tiny little house, but everything in it was so clean and neat
and elegant that it is beyond description. In the middle of the room
stood a small table, covered with a snow-white table-cloth, ready for
supper. On it were arranged seven little plates, seven little spoons,
seven little knives and forks, and seven mugs. By the wall stood seven
little beds, near each other, covered with white quilts.

Poor Snow-white, who was hungry and thirsty, ate a few vegetables and a
little bread from each plate, and drank a little drop of wine from each
cup, for she did not like to take all she wanted from one alone. After
this, feeling very tired, she thought she would lie down and rest on one
of the beds, but she found it difficult to choose one to suit her. One
was too long, another too short; so she tried them all till she came to
the seventh, and that was so comfortable that she laid herself down, and
was soon fast asleep.

When it was quite dark the masters of the house came home. They were
seven little dwarfs, who dug and searched in the mountains for minerals.
First they lighted seven little lamps, and as soon as the room was full
of light they saw that some one had been there, for everything did not
stand in the order in which they had left it.

Then said the first, "Who has been sitting in my little chair?"

The second exclaimed, "Who has been eating from my little plate?"

The third cried, "Some one has taken part of my bread."

"Who has been eating my vegetables?" said the fourth.

Then said the fifth, "Some one has used my fork."

The sixth cried, "And who has been cutting with my knife?"

"And some one has been drinking out of my cup," said the seventh.

Then the eldest looked at his bed, and, seeing that it looked tumbled,
cried out that some one had been upon it. The others came running
forward, and found all their beds in the same condition. But when the
seventh approached his bed, and saw Snow-white lying there fast asleep,
he called the others, who came quickly, and holding their lights over
their heads, cried out in wonder as they beheld the sleeping child. "Oh,
what a beautiful little child!" they said to each other, and were so
delighted that they would not awaken her, but left her to sleep as long
as she liked in the little bed, while its owner slept with one of his
companions, and so the night passed away.

In the morning, when Snow-white awoke, and saw all the dwarfs, she was
terribly frightened. But they spoke kindly to her, till she lost all
fear, and they asked her name.

"I am called Snow-white," she replied.

"But how came you to our house?" asked one.

Then she related to them all that had happened; how her stepmother had
sent her into the wood with the hunter, who had spared her life, and
that, after wandering about for a whole day, she had found their house.

The dwarfs talked a little while together, and then one said, "Do you
think you could be our little housekeeper, to make the beds, cook the
dinner, and wash and sew and knit for us, and keep everything neat and
clean and orderly? If you can, then you shall stay here with us, and
nobody shall hurt you."

"Oh yes, I will try," said Snow-white. So they let her stay, and she was
a clever little thing. She managed very well, and kept the house quite
clean and in order. And while they were gone to the mountains to find
gold, she got their supper ready, and they were very happy together.

But every morning when they left her, the kind little dwarfs warned
Snow-white to be careful. While the maiden was alone they knew she was
in danger, and told her not to show herself, for her stepmother would
soon find out where she was, and said, "Whatever you do, let nobody into
the house while we are gone."

After the wicked queen had proved, as she thought, that Snow-white was
dead, she felt quite satisfied there was no one in the world now likely
to become so beautiful as herself, so she stepped up to her mirror and
asked:

    "Mirror, mirror on the wall,
     Who is most beautiful of all?"

To her vexation the mirror replied:

  "Fair queen, at home there is none like thee,
   But over the mountains is Snow-white free,
   With seven little dwarfs, who are strange to see;
   A thousand times fairer than thou is she."

The queen was furious when she heard this, for she knew the mirror was
truthful, and that the hunter must have deceived her, and that
Snow-white still lived. So she sat and pondered over these facts,
thinking what would be best to do, for as long as she was not the most
beautiful woman in the land, her jealousy gave her no peace. After a
time, she decided what to do. First, she painted her face, and whitened
her hair; then she dressed herself in old woman's clothes, and was so
disguised that no one could have recognised her.

Watching an opportunity, she left the castle, and took her way to the
wood near the mountains, where the seven little dwarfs lived. When she
reached the door, she knocked, and cried, "Beautiful goods to sell;
beautiful goods to sell."

Snow-white, when she heard it, peeped through the window, and said,
"Good-day, old lady. What have you in your basket for me to buy?"

"Everything that is pretty," she replied; "laces, and pearls, and
earrings, and bracelets of every colour;" and she held up her basket,
which was lined with glittering silk.

"I can let in this respectable old woman," thought Snow-white; "she will
not harm me." So she unbolted the door, and told her to come in. Oh, how
delighted Snow-white was with the pretty things; she bought several
trinkets, and a beautiful silk lace for her stays, but she did not see
the evil eye of the old woman who was watching her. Presently she said,
"Child, come here; I will show you how to lace your stays properly."
Snow-white had no suspicion, so she placed herself before the old woman
that she might lace her stays. But no sooner was the lace in the holes
than she began to lace so fast and pull so tight that Snow-white could
not breathe, and presently fell down at her feet as if dead.

"Now you are beautiful indeed," said the woman, and, fancying she heard
footsteps, she rushed away as quickly as she could.

Not long after, the seven dwarfs came home, and they were terribly
frightened to see dear little Snow-white lying on the ground without
motion, as if she were dead. They lifted her up, and saw in a moment
that her stays had been laced too tight Quickly they cut the stay-lace
in two, till Snow-white began to breathe a little, and after a time was
restored to life. But when the dwarfs heard what had happened, they
said: "That old market-woman was no other than your wicked stepmother.
Snow-white, you must never again let anyone in while we are not with
you."

The wicked queen when she returned home, after, as she thought, killing
Snow-white, went to her looking-glass and asked:

    "Mirror, mirror on the wall,
     Am I most beautiful of all?"

Then answered the mirror:

  "Queen, thou art not the fairest now;
   Snow-white over the mountain's brow
   A thousand times fairer is than thou."

When she heard this she was so terrified that the blood rushed to her
heart, for she knew that after all she had done Snow-white was still
alive. "I must think of something else," she said to herself, "to get
rid of that odious child."

Now this wicked queen had some knowledge of witchcraft, and she knew how
to poison a comb, so that whoever used it would fall dead. This the
wicked stepmother soon got ready, and dressing herself again like an old
woman, but quite different from the last, she started off to travel over
the mountains to the dwarfs' cottage.

When Snow-white heard the old cry, "Goods to sell, fine goods to sell,"
she looked out of the window and said:

"Go away, go away; I must not let you in."

"Look at this, then," said the woman; "you shall have it for your own if
you like," and she held up before the child's eyes the bright
tortoise-shell comb which she had poisoned.

Poor Snow-white could not refuse such a present, so she opened the door
and let the woman in, quite forgetting the advice of the dwarfs. After
she had bought a few things, the old woman said, "Let me try this comb
in your hair; it is so fine it will make it beautifully smooth and
glossy."

So Snow-white, thinking no wrong, stood before the woman to have her
hair dressed; but no sooner had the comb touched the roots of her hair
than the poison took effect, and the maiden fell to the ground lifeless.

"You paragon of beauty," said the wicked woman, "all has just happened
as I expected," and then she went away quickly.

Fortunately evening soon arrived, and the seven dwarfs returned home.
When they saw Snow-white lying dead on the ground, they knew at once
that the stepmother had been there again; but on seeing the poisoned
comb in her hair they pulled it out quickly, and Snow-white very soon
came to herself, and related all that had passed.

Again they warned her not to let anyone enter the house during their
absence, and on no account to open the door; but Snow-white was not
clever enough to resist her clever wicked stepmother, and she forgot to
obey.

The wicked queen felt sure now that she had really killed Snow-white; so
as soon as she returned home she went to her looking-glass, and
inquired:

    "Mirror, mirror on the wall,
     Who is most beautiful of all?"

But the mirror replied:

  "Queen, thou art the fairest here,
   But not when Snow-white is near;
   Over the mountains still is she,
   Fairer a thousand times than thee."

As the looking-glass thus replied, the queen trembled and quaked with
rage. "Snow-white shall die," cried she, "if it costs me my own life!"

Then she went into a lonely forbidden chamber where no one was allowed
to come, and poisoned a beautiful apple. Outwardly it looked ripe and
tempting, of a pale green with rosy cheeks, so that it made everyone's
mouth water to look at it, but whoever ate even a small piece must die.

As soon as this apple was ready, the wicked queen painted her face,
disguised her hair, dressed herself as a farmer's wife, and went again
over the mountains to the dwarfs' cottage.

When she knocked at the door, Snow-white stretched her head out of the
window, and said, "I dare not let you in; the seven dwarfs have
forbidden me."

"But I am all right," said the farmer's wife. "Stay, I will show you my
apples. Are they not beautiful? let me make you a present of one."

"No, thank you," cried Snow-white; "I dare not take it."

"What!" cried the woman, "are you afraid it is poisoned? Look here now,
I will cut the apple in halves; you shall have the rosy-cheek side, and
I will eat the other."

The apple was so cleverly made that the red side alone was poisonous.
Snow-white longed so much for the beautiful fruit as she saw the
farmer's wife eat one half that she could not any longer resist, but
stretched out her hand from the window and took the poisoned half. But
no sooner had she taken one mouthful than she fell on the ground dead.

Then the wicked queen glanced in at the window with a horrible look in
her eye, and laughed aloud as she exclaimed:

"White as snow, red as blood, and black as ebony; this time the dwarfs
will not be able to awake thee."

And as soon as she arrived at home, and asked her mirror who was the
most beautiful in the land, it replied:

  "Fair queen, there is none in all the land
   So beautiful as thou."

Then had her envious heart rest, at least such rest as a heart full of
envy and malice ever can have.

The little dwarfs, when they came home in the evening, found poor
Snow-white on the ground; but though they lifted her up, there were no
signs of breath from her mouth, and they found she was really dead. Yet
they tried in every way to restore her; they tried to extract the poison
from her lips, they combed her hair, and washed it with wine and water,
but all to no purpose: the dear child gave no signs of life, and at last
they knew she was dead. Then they laid her on a bier, and the seven
dwarfs seated themselves round her, and wept and mourned for three days.
They would have buried her then, but there was no change in her
appearance; her face was as fresh, and her cheeks and lips had their
usual colour. Then said one, "We cannot lay this beautiful child in the
dark, cold earth."

So they agreed to have a coffin made entirely of glass, transparent all
over, that they might watch for any signs of decay, and they wrote in
letters of gold her name on the lid, and that she was the daughter of a
king. The coffin was placed on the side of the mountain, and each of
them watched it by turns, so that it was never left alone. And the birds
of the air came near and mourned for Snow-white; first the owl, then the
raven, and at last the dove. Snow-white lay for a long, long time in the
glass coffin, but showed not the least signs of decay. It seemed as if
she slept; for her skin was snow white, her cheeks rosy red, and her
hair black as ebony.

It happened one day that the son of a king, while riding in the forest,
came by chance upon the dwarfs' house and asked for a night's lodging.
As he left the next morning he saw the coffin on the mountain-side, with
beautiful Snow-white lying in it, and read what was written upon the lid
in letters of gold.

Then he said to the dwarfs, "Let me have this coffin, and I will give
you for it whatever you ask."

But the elder dwarf answered, "We would not give it thee for all the
gold in the world."

But the prince answered, "Let me have it as a gift, then. I know not
why, but my heart is drawn towards this beautiful child, and I feel I
cannot live without her. If you will let me have her, she shall be
treated with the greatest honour and respect as one dearly beloved."

As he thus spoke the good little dwarfs were full of sympathy for him,
and gave him the coffin. Then the prince called his servants, and the
coffin was placed on their shoulders, and they carried it away, followed
by the king's son, who watched it carefully. Now it happened that one of
them made a false step and stumbled. This shook the coffin, and caused
the poisoned piece of apple which Snow-white had bitten to roll out of
her mouth. A little while after she suddenly opened her eyes, lifted up
the coffin-lid, raised herself and was again alive.

"Oh! where am I?" she cried.

Full of joy, the king's son approached her, and said, "Dear Snow-white,
you are safe; you are with me."

Then he related to her all that had happened, and what the little dwarfs
had told him about her, and said at last, "I love you better than all in
the world besides, dear little Snow-white, and you must come with me to
my father's castle and be my wife."

Then was Snow-white taken out of the coffin and placed in a carriage to
travel with the prince, and the king was so pleased with his son's
choice that the marriage was soon after celebrated with great pomp and
magnificence.

Now it happened that the stepmother of Snow-white was invited, among
other guests, to the wedding-feast. Before she left her house she stood
in all her rich dress before the magic mirror to admire her own
appearance, but she could not help saying;

    "Mirror, mirror on the wall,
     Am I most beautiful of all?"

Then to her surprise the mirror replied:

  "Fair queen, thou art the fairest here,
     But at the palace, now,
   The bride will prove a thousand times
     More beautiful than thou."

Then the wicked woman uttered a curse, and was so dreadfully alarmed
that she knew not what to do. At first she declared she would not go to
this wedding at all, but she felt it impossible to rest until she had
seen the bride, so she determined to go. But what was her astonishment
and vexation when she recognised in the young bride Snow-white herself,
now grown a charming young woman, and richly dressed in royal robes! Her
rage and terror were so great that she stood still and could not move
for some minutes. At last she went into the ballroom, but the slippers
she wore were to her as iron bands full of coals of fire, in which she
was obliged to dance. And so in the red, glowing shoes she continued to
dance till she fell dead on the floor, a sad example of envy and
jealousy.




CHAPTER III

THE ENCHANTED STAG


There were once a brother and sister who loved each other dearly; their
mother was dead, and their father had married again a woman who was most
unkind and cruel to them. One day the boy took his sister's hand, and
said to her, "Dear little sister, since our mother died we have not had
one happy hour. Our stepmother gives us dry hard crusts for dinner and
supper; she often knocks us about, and threatens to kick us out of the
house. Even the little dogs under the table fare better than we do, for
she often throws them nice pieces to eat. Heaven pity us! Oh, if our
dear mother knew! Come, let us go out into the wide world!"

So they went out, and wandered over fields and meadows the whole day
till evening. At last they found themselves in a large forest; it began
to rain, and the little sister said, "See, brother, heaven and our
hearts weep together." At last, tired out with hunger and sorrow, and
the long journey, they crept into a hollow tree, laid themselves down,
and slept till morning.

When they awoke the sun was high in the heavens, and shone brightly into
the hollow tree, so they left their place of shelter and wandered away
in search of water.

"Oh, I am so thirsty!" said the boy. "If we could only find a brook or a
stream." He stopped to listen, and said, "Stay, I think I hear a running
stream." So he took his sister by the hand, and they ran together to
find it.

Now, the stepmother of these poor children was a wicked witch. She had
seen the children go away, and, following them cautiously like a snake,
had bewitched all the springs and streams in the forest. The pleasant
trickling of a brook over the pebbles was heard by the children as they
reached it, and the boy was just stooping to drink, when the sister
heard in the babbling of the brook:

    "Whoever drinks of me, a tiger soon will be."

Then she cried quickly, "Stay, brother, stay! do not drink, or you will
become a wild beast, and tear me to pieces."

Thirsty as he was, the brother conquered his desire to drink at her
words, and said, "Dear sister, I will wait till we come to a spring." So
they wandered farther, but as they approached, she heard in the bubbling
spring the words--

    "Who drinks of me, a wolf will be."

"Brother, I pray you, do not drink of this brook; you will be changed
into a wolf, and devour me."

Again the brother denied himself and promised to wait; but he said, "At
the next stream I must drink, say what you will, my thirst is so great."

Not far off ran a pretty streamlet, looking clear and bright; but here
also in its murmuring waters, the sister heard the words--

    "Who dares to drink of me,
     Turned to a stag will be."

"Dear brother, do not drink," she began; but she was too late, for her
brother had already knelt by the stream to drink, and as the first drop
of water touched his lips he became a fawn. How the little sister wept
over the enchanted brother, and the fawn wept also.

He did not run away, but stayed close to her; and at last she said,
"Stand still, dear fawn; don't fear, I must take care of you, but I will
never leave you." So she untied her little golden garter and fastened it
round the neck of the fawn; then she gathered some soft green rushes,
and braided them into a soft string, which she fastened to the fawn's
golden collar, and then led him away into the depths of the forest.

After wandering about for some time, they at last found a little
deserted hut, and the sister was overjoyed, for she thought it would
form a nice shelter for them both. So she led the fawn in, and then went
out alone, to gather moss and dried leaves, to make him a soft bed.

Every morning she went out to gather dried roots, nuts, and berries, for
her own food, and sweet fresh grass for the fawn, which he ate out of
her hand, and the poor little animal went out with her, and played about
as happy as the day was long.

When evening came, and the poor sister felt tired, she would kneel down
and say her prayers, and then lay her delicate head on the fawn's back,
which was a soft warm pillow, on which she could sleep peacefully. Had
this dear brother only kept his own proper form, how happy they would
have been together! After they had been alone in the forest for some
time, and the little sister had grown a lovely maiden, and the fawn a
large stag, a numerous hunting party came to the forest, and amongst
them the king of the country.

The sounding horn, the barking of the dogs, the holloa of the huntsmen,
resounded through the forest, and were heard by the stag, who became
eager to join his companions.

"Oh dear," he said, "do let me go and see the hunt; I cannot restrain
myself." And he begged so hard that at last she reluctantly consented.

"But remember," she said, "I must lock the cottage door against those
huntsmen, so when you come back in the evening, and knock, I shall not
admit you, unless you say, 'Dear little sister let me in.'"

He bounded off as she spoke, scarcely stopping to listen, for it was so
delightful for him to breathe the fresh air and be free again.

He had not run far when the king's chief hunter caught sight of the
beautiful animal, and started off in chase of him; but it was no easy
matter to overtake such rapid footsteps. Once, when he thought he had
him safe, the fawn sprang over the bushes and disappeared.

As it was now nearly dark, he ran up to the little cottage, knocked at
the door, and cried, "Dear little sister, let me in." The door was
instantly opened, and oh, how glad his sister was to see him safely
resting on his soft pleasant bed!

A few days after this, the huntsmen were again in the forest; and when
the fawn heard the holloa, he could not rest in peace, but begged his
sister again to let him go.

She opened the door, and said, "I will let you go this time; but pray do
not forget to say what I told you, when you return this evening."

The chief hunter very soon espied the beautiful fawn with the golden
collar, pointed it out to the king, and they determined to hunt it.

They chased him with all their skill till the evening; but he was too
light and nimble for them to catch, till a shot wounded him slightly in
the foot, so that he was obliged to hide himself in the bushes, and,
after the huntsmen were gone, limp slowly home.

One of them, however, determined to follow him at a distance, and
discover where he went. What was his surprise at seeing him go up to a
door and knock, and to hear him say, "Dear little sister, let me in."
The door was only opened a little way, and quickly shut; but the
huntsman had seen enough to make him full of wonder, when he returned
and described to the king what he had seen.

"We will have one more chase to-morrow," said the king, "and discover
this mystery."

In the meantime the loving sister was terribly alarmed at finding the
stag's foot wounded and bleeding. She quickly washed off the blood, and,
after bathing the wound, placed healing herbs on it, and said, "Lie down
on your bed, dear fawn, and the wound will soon heal, if you rest your
foot."

In the morning the wound was so much better that the fawn felt the foot
almost as strong as ever, and so, when he again heard the holloa of the
hunters, he could not rest. "Oh, dear sister, I must go once more; it
will be easy for me to avoid the hunters now, and my foot feels quite
well; they will not hunt me unless they see me running, and I don't mean
to do that."

But his sister wept, and begged him not to go: "If they kill you, dear
fawn, I shall be here alone in the forest, forsaken by the whole world."

"And I shall die of grief," he said, "if I remain here listening to the
hunter's horn."

So at length his sister, with a heavy heart, set him free, and he
bounded away joyfully into the forest.

As soon as the king caught sight of him, he said to the huntsmen,
"Follow that stag about, but don't hurt him." So they hunted him all
day, but at the approach of sunset the king said to the hunter who had
followed the fawn the day before, "Come and show me the little cottage."

So they went together, and when the king saw it he sent his companion
home, and went on alone so quickly that he arrived there before the
fawn; and, going up to the little door, knocked and said softly, "Dear
little sister, let me in."

As the door opened, the king stepped in, and in great astonishment saw a
maiden more beautiful than he had ever seen in his life standing before
him. But how frightened she felt to see instead of her dear little fawn
a noble gentleman walk in with a gold crown on his head.

However, he appeared very friendly, and after a little talk he held out
his hand to her, and said, "Wilt thou go with me to my castle and be my
dear wife?"

"Ah yes," replied the maiden, "I would willingly; but I cannot leave my
dear fawn: he must go with me wherever I am."

"He shall remain with you as long as you live," replied the king, "and I
will never ask you to forsake him."

While they were talking, the fawn came bounding in, looking quite well
and happy. Then his sister fastened the string of rushes to his collar,
took it in her hand, and led him away from the cottage in the wood to
where the king's beautiful horse waited for him.

The king placed the maiden before him on his horse and rode away to his
castle, the fawn following by their side. Soon after, their marriage was
celebrated with great splendour, and the fawn was taken the greatest
care of, and played where he pleased, or roamed about the castle grounds
in happiness and safety.

In the meantime the wicked stepmother, who had caused these two young
people such misery, supposed that the sister had been devoured by wild
beasts, and that the fawn had been hunted to death. Therefore when she
heard of their happiness, such envy and malice arose in her heart that
she could find no rest till she had tried to destroy it.

She and her ugly daughter came to the castle when the queen had a little
baby, and one of them pretended to be a nurse, and at last got the
mother and child into their power.

They shut the queen up in the bath, and tried to suffocate her, and the
old woman put her own ugly daughter in the queen's bed that the king
might not know she was away.

She would not, however, let him speak to her, but pretended that she
must be kept quite quiet.

The queen escaped from the bath-room, where the wicked old woman had
locked her up, but she did not go far, as she wanted to watch over her
child and the little fawn.

For two nights the baby's nurse saw a figure of the queen come into the
room and take up her baby and nurse it. Then she told the king, and he
determined to watch himself. The old stepmother, who acted as nurse to
her ugly daughter, whom she tried to make the king believe was his wife,
had said that the queen was too weak to see him, and never left her
room. "There cannot be two queens," said the king to himself, "so
to-night I will watch in the nursery." As soon as the figure came in and
took up her baby, he saw it was his real wife, and caught her in his
arms, saying, "You are my own beloved wife, as beautiful as ever."

The wicked witch had thrown her into a trance, hoping she would die, and
that the king would then marry her daughter; but on the king speaking to
her, the spell was broken. The queen told the king how cruelly she had
been treated by her stepmother, and on hearing this he became very
angry, and had the witch and her daughter brought to justice. They were
both sentenced to die--the daughter to be devoured by wild beasts, and
the mother to be burnt alive.

No sooner, however, was she reduced to ashes than the charm which held
the queen's brother in the form of a stag was broken; he recovered his
own natural shape, and appeared before them a tall, handsome young man.

After this, the brother and sister lived happily and peacefully for the
rest of their lives.




CHAPTER IV

HANSEL AND GRETHEL


Near the borders of a large forest dwelt in olden times a poor
wood-cutter, who had two children--a boy named Hansel, and his sister,
Grethel. They had very little to live upon, and once when there was a
dreadful season of scarcity in the land, the poor wood-cutter could not
earn sufficient to supply their daily food.

One evening, after the children were gone to bed, the parents sat
talking together over their sorrow, and the poor husband sighed, and
said to his wife, who was not the mother of his children, but their
stepmother, "What will become of us, for I cannot earn enough to support
myself and you, much less the children? what shall we do with them, for
they must not starve?"

"I know what to do, husband," she replied; "early to-morrow morning we
will take the children for a walk across the forest and leave them in
the thickest part; they will never find the way home again, you may
depend, and then we shall only have to work for ourselves."

"No, wife," said the man, "that I will never do. How could I have the
heart to leave my children all alone in the wood, where the wild beasts
would come quickly and devour them?"

"Oh, you fool," replied the stepmother, "if you refuse to do this, you
know we must all four perish with hunger; you may as well go and cut the
wood for our coffins." And after this she let him have no peace till he
became quite worn out, and could not sleep for hours, but lay thinking
in sorrow about his children.

The two children, who also were too hungry to sleep, heard all that
their stepmother had said to their father. Poor little Grethel wept
bitter tears as she listened, and said to her brother, "What is going to
happen to us, Hansel?"

"Hush, Grethel," he whispered, "don't be so unhappy; I know what to do."

Then they lay quite still till their parents were asleep.

As soon as it was quiet, Hansel got up, put on his little coat,
unfastened the door, and slipped out The moon shone brightly, and the
white pebble stones which lay before the cottage door glistened like new
silver money. Hansel stooped and picked up as many of the pebbles as he
could stuff in his little coat pockets. He then went back to Grethel and
said, "Be comforted, dear little sister, and sleep in peace; heaven will
take care of us." Then he laid himself down again in bed, and slept till
the day broke.

As soon as the sun was risen, the stepmother came and woke the two
children, and said, "Get up, you lazy bones, and come into the wood with
me to gather wood for the fire." Then she gave each of them a piece of
bread, and said, "You must keep that to eat for your dinner, and don't
quarrel over it, for you will get nothing more."

Grethel took the bread under her charge, for Hansel's pockets were full
of pebbles. Then the stepmother led them a long way into the forest.
They had gone but a very short distance when Hansel looked back at the
house, and this he did again and again.

At last his stepmother said, "Why do you keep staying behind and looking
back so?"

"Oh, mother," said the boy, "I can see my little white cat sitting on
the roof of the house, and I am sure she is crying for me."

"Nonsense," she replied; "that is not your cat; it is the morning sun
shining on the chimney-pot."

Hansel had seen no cat, but he stayed behind every time to drop a white
pebble from his pocket on the ground as they walked.

As soon as they reached a thick part of the wood, their stepmother said:

"Come, children, gather some wood, and I will make a fire, for it is
very cold here."

Then Hansel and Grethel raised quite a high heap of brushwood and
faggots, which soon blazed up into a bright fire, and the woman said to
them:

"Sit down here, children, and rest, while I go and find your father, who
is cutting wood in the forest; when we have finished our work, we will
come again and fetch you."

Hansel and Grethel seated themselves by the fire, and when noon arrived
they each ate the piece of bread which their stepmother had given them
for their dinner; and as long as they heard the strokes of the axe they
felt safe, for they believed that their father was working near them.
But it was not an axe they heard--only a branch which still hung on a
withered tree, and was moved up and down by the wind. At last, when they
had been sitting there a long time, the children's eyes became heavy
with fatigue, and they fell fast asleep. When they awoke it was dark
night, and poor Grethel began to cry, and said, "Oh, how shall we get
out of the wood?"

But Hansel comforted her. "Don't fear," he said; "let us wait a little
while till the moon rises, and then we shall easily find our way home."

Very soon the full moon rose, and then Hansel took his little sister by
the hand, and the white pebble stones, which glittered like newly-coined
money in the moonlight, and which Hansel had dropped as he walked,
pointed out the way. They walked all the night through, and did not
reach their father's house till break of day.

They knocked at the door, and when their stepmother opened it, she
exclaimed: "You naughty children, why have you been staying so long in
the forest? we thought you were never coming back," But their father was
overjoyed to see them, for it grieved him to the heart to think that
they had been left alone in the wood.

Not long after this there came another time of scarcity and want in
every house, and the children heard their stepmother talking after they
were in bed. "The times are as bad as ever," she said; "we have just
half a loaf left, and when that is gone all love will be at an end. The
children must go away; we will take them deeper into the forest this
time, and they will not be able to find their way home as they did
before; it is the only plan to save ourselves from starvation." But the
husband felt heavy at heart, for he thought it was better to share the
last morsel with his children.

His wife would listen to nothing he said, but continued to reproach him,
and as he had given way to her the first time, he could not refuse to do
so now. The children were awake, and heard all the conversation; so, as
soon as their parents slept, Hansel got up, intending to go out and
gather some more of the bright pebbles to let fall as he walked, that
they might point out the way home; but his stepmother had locked the
door, and he could not open it. When he went back to his bed he told his
little sister not to fret, but to go to sleep in peace, for he was sure
they would be taken care of.

Early the next morning the stepmother came and pulled the children out
of bed, and, when they were dressed, gave them each a piece of bread for
their dinners, smaller than they had had before, and then they started
on their way to the wood.

As they walked, Hansel, who had the bread in his pocket, broke off
little crumbs, and stopped every now and then to drop one, turning round
as if he was looking back at his home.

"Hansel," said the woman, "what are you stopping for in that way? Come
along directly."

"I saw my pigeon sitting on the roof, and he wants to say good-bye to
me," replied the boy.

"Nonsense," she said; "that is not your pigeon; it is only the morning
sun shining on the chimney-top."

But Hansel did not look back any more; he only dropped pieces of bread
behind him, as they walked through the wood. This time they went on till
they reached the thickest and densest part of the forest, where they had
never been before in all their lives. Again they gathered faggots and
brushwood, of which the stepmother made up a large fire. Then she said,
"Remain here, children, and rest, while I go to help your father, who is
cutting wood in the forest; when you feel tired, you can lie down and
sleep for a little while, and we will come and fetch you in the evening,
when your father has finished his work."

So the children remained alone till mid-day, and then Grethel shared her
piece of bread with Hansel, for he had scattered his own all along the
road as they walked. After this they slept for awhile, and the evening
drew on; but no one came to fetch the poor children. When they awoke it
was quite dark, and poor little Grethel was afraid; but Hansel comforted
her, as he had done before, by telling her they need only wait till the
moon rose. "You know, little sister," he said, "that I have thrown
breadcrumbs all along the road we came, and they will easily point out
the way home."

But when they went out of the thicket into the moonlight they found no
breadcrumbs, for the numerous birds which inhabited the trees of the
forest had picked them all up.

Hansel tried to hide his fear when he made this sad discovery, and said
to his sister, "Cheer up, Grethel; I dare say we shall find our way home
without the crumbs. Let us try." But this they found impossible. They
wandered about the whole night, and the next day from morning till
evening; but they could not get out of the wood, and were so hungry that
had it not been for a few berries which they picked they must have
starved.

At last they were so tired that their poor little legs could carry them
no farther; so they laid themselves down under a tree and went to sleep.
When they awoke it was the third morning since they had left their
father's house, and they determined to try once more to find their way
home; but it was no use, they only went still deeper into the wood, and
knew that if no help came they must starve.

About noon, they saw a beautiful snow-white bird sitting on the branch
of a tree, and singing so beautifully that they stood still to listen.
When he had finished his song, he spread out his wings and flew on
before them. The children followed him, till at last they saw at a
distance a small house; and the bird flew and perched on the roof.

But how surprised were the boy and girl, when they came nearer, to find
that the house was built of gingerbread, and ornamented with sweet cakes
and tarts, while the window was formed of barley-sugar. "Oh!" exclaimed
Hansel, "let us stop here and have a splendid feast. I will have a piece
from the roof first, Grethel; and you can eat some of the barley-sugar
window, it tastes so nice." Hansel reached up on tiptoe, and breaking
off a piece of the gingerbread, he began to eat with all his might, for
he was very hungry. Grethel seated herself on the doorstep, and began
munching away at the cakes of which it was made. Presently a voice came
out of the cottage:

  "Munching, crunching, munching,
   Who's eating up my house?"

Then answered the children:

    "The wind, the wind,
     Only the wind,"

and went on eating as if they never meant to leave off, without a
suspicion of wrong. Hansel, who found the cake on the roof taste very
good, broke off another large piece, and Grethel had just taken out a
whole pane of barley-sugar from the window, and seated herself to eat
it, when the door opened, and a strange-looking old woman came out
leaning on a stick.

Hansel and Grethel were so frightened that they let fall what they held
in their hands. The old woman shook her head at them, and said, "Ah, you
dear children, who has brought you here? Come in, and stay with me for a
little while, and there shall no harm happen to you." She seized them
both by the hands as she spoke, and led them into the house. She gave
them for supper plenty to eat and drink--milk and pancakes and sugar,
apples and nuts; and when evening came, Hansel and Grethel were shown
two beautiful little beds with white curtains, and they lay down in them
and thought they were in heaven.

But although the old woman pretended to be friendly, she was a wicked
witch, who had her house built of gingerbread on purpose to entrap
children. When once they were in her power, she would feed them well
till they got fat, and then kill them and cook them for her dinner; and
this she called her feast-day. Fortunately the witch had weak eyes, and
could not see very well; but she had a very keen scent, as wild animals
have, and could easily discover when human beings were near. As Hansel
and Grethel had approached her cottage, she laughed to herself
maliciously, and said, with a sneer: "I have them now; they shall not
escape from me again!"

Early in the morning, before the children were awake, she was up,
standing by their beds; and when she saw how beautiful they looked in
their sleep, with their round rosy cheeks, she muttered to herself,
"What nice tit-bits they will be!" Then she laid hold of Hansel with her
rough hand, dragged him out of bed, and led him to a little cage which
had a lattice-door, and shut him in; he might scream as much as he
would, but it was all useless.

After this she went back to Grethel, and, shaking her roughly till she
woke, cried: "Get up, you lazy hussy, and draw some water, that I may
boil something good for your brother, who is shut up in a cage outside
till he gets fat; and then I shall cook him and eat him!" When Grethel
heard this she began to cry bitterly; but it was all useless, she was
obliged to do as the wicked witch told her.

For poor Hansel's breakfast the best of everything was cooked; but
Grethel had nothing for herself but a crab's claw. Every morning the old
woman would go out to the little cage, and say: "Hansel, stick out your
finger, that I may feel if you are fat enough for eating." But Hansel,
who knew how dim her old eyes were, always stuck a bone through the bars
of his cage, which she thought was his finger, for she could not see;
and when she felt how thin it was, she wondered very much why he did not
get fat.

However, as the weeks went on, and Hansel seemed not to get any fatter,
she became impatient, and said she could not wait any longer. "Go,
Grethel," she cried to the maiden, "be quick and draw water; Hansel may
be fat or lean, I don't care, to-morrow morning I mean to kill him, and
cook him!"

Oh! how the poor little sister grieved when she was forced to draw the
water; and, as the tears rolled down her cheeks, she exclaimed: "It
would have been better to be eaten by wild beasts, or to have been
starved to death in the woods; then we should have died together!"

"Stop your crying!" cried the old woman; "it is not of the least use, no
one will come to help you."

Early in the morning Grethel was obliged to go out and fill the great
pot with water, and hang it over the fire to boil. As soon as this was
done, the old woman said, "We will bake some bread first; I have made
the oven hot, and the dough is already kneaded." Then she dragged poor
little Grethel up to the oven door, under which the flames were burning
fiercely, and said: "Creep in there, and see if it is hot enough yet to
bake the bread." But if Grethel had obeyed her, she would have shut the
poor child in and baked her for dinner, instead of boiling Hansel.

Grethel, however, guessed what she wanted to do, and said, "I don't know
how to get in through that narrow door."

"Stupid goose," said the old woman, "why, the oven door is quite large
enough for me; just look, I could get in myself." As she spoke she
stepped forward and pretended to put her head in the oven.

A sudden thought gave Grethel unusual strength; she started forward,
gave the old woman a push which sent her right into the oven, then she
shut the iron door and fastened the bolt.

Oh! how the old witch did howl, it was quite horrible to hear her. But
Grethel ran away, and therefore she was left to burn, just as she had
left many poor little children to burn. And how quickly Grethel ran to
Hansel, opened the door of his cage, and cried, "Hansel, Hansel, we are
free; the old witch is dead." He flew like a bird out of his cage at
these words as soon as the door was opened, and the children were so
overjoyed that they ran into each other's arms, and kissed each other
with the greatest love.

And now that there was nothing to be afraid of, they went back into the
house, and while looking round the old witch's room, they saw an old oak
chest, which they opened, and found it full of pearls and precious
stones. "These are better than pebbles," said Hansel; and he filled his
pockets as full as they would hold.

"I will carry some home too," said Grethel, and she held out her apron,
which held quite as much as Hansel's pockets.

"We will go now," he said, "and get away as soon as we can from this
enchanted forest."

They had been walking for nearly two hours when they came to a large
sheet of water.

"What shall we do now?" said the boy. "We cannot get across, and there
is no bridge of any sort."

"Oh! here comes a boat," cried Grethel, but she was mistaken; it was
only a white duck which came swimming towards the children. "Perhaps she
will help us across if we ask her," said the child; and she sung,
"Little duck, do help poor Hansel and Grethel; there is not a bridge,
nor a boat--will you let us sail across on your white back?"

The good-natured duck came near the bank as Grethel spoke, so close
indeed that Hansel could seat himself and wanted to take his little
sister on his lap, but she said, "No, we shall be too heavy for the kind
duck; let her take us over one at a time."

The good creature did as the children wished; she carried Grethel over
first, and then came back for Hansel. And then how happy the children
were to find themselves in a part of the wood which they remembered
quite well, and as they walked on, the more familiar it became, till at
last they caught sight of their father's house. Then they began to run,
and, bursting into the room, threw themselves into their father's arms.

Poor man, he had not had a moment's peace since the children had been
left alone in the forest; he was full of joy at finding them safe and
well again, and now they had nothing to fear, for their wicked
stepmother was dead.

But how surprised the poor wood-cutter was when Grethel opened and shook
her little apron to see the glittering pearls and precious stones
scattered about the room, while Hansel drew handful after handful from
his pockets. From this moment all his care and sorrow was at an end, and
the father lived in happiness with his children till his death.




CHAPTER V

THE STORY OF ALADDIN; OR, THE WONDERFUL LAMP


In one of the large and rich cities of China, there once lived a tailor
named Mustapha. He was very poor. He could hardly, by his daily labour,
maintain himself and his family, which consisted only of his wife and a
son.

His son, who was called Aladdin, was a very careless and idle fellow. He
was disobedient to his father and mother, and would go out early in the
morning and stay out all day, playing in the streets and public places
with idle children of his own age.

When he was old enough to learn a trade, his father took him into his
own shop, and taught him how to use his needle; but all his father's
endeavours to keep him to his work were vain, for no sooner was his back
turned, than he was gone for that day, Mustapha chastised him, but
Aladdin was incorrigible, and his father, to his great grief, was forced
to abandon him to his idleness; and was so much troubled about him, that
he fell sick and died in a few months.

Aladdin, who was now no longer restrained by the fear of a father, gave
himself entirely over to his idle habits, and was never out of the
streets from his companions. This course he followed till he was fifteen
years old, without giving his mind to any useful pursuit, or the least
reflection on what would become of him. As he was one day playing,
according to custom, in the street, with his evil associates, a stranger
passing by stood to observe him.

This stranger was a sorcerer, known as the African magician, as he had
been but two days arrived from Africa, his native country.

The African magician, observing in Aladdin's countenance something which
assured him that he was a fit boy for his purpose, inquired his name and
history of some of his companions, and when he had learnt all he desired
to know, went up to him, and taking him aside from his comrades, said,
"Child, was not your father called Mustapha the tailor?" "Yes, sir,"
answered the boy, "but he has been dead a long time."

At these words the African magician threw his arms about Aladdin's neck,
and kissed him several times, with tears in his eyes, and said, "I am
your uncle. Your worthy father was my own brother. I knew you at first
sight, you are so like him." Then he gave Aladdin a handful of small
money, saying, "Go, my son, to your mother, give my love to her, and
tell her that I will visit her to-morrow, that I may see where my good
brother lived so long, and ended his days."

Aladdin ran to his mother, overjoyed at the money his uncle had given
him. "Mother," said he, "have I an uncle?" "No, child," replied his
mother, "you have no uncle by your father's side or mine." "I am just
now come," said Aladdin, "from a man who says he is my uncle and my
father's brother. He cried and kissed me when I told him my father was
dead, and gave me money, sending his love to you, and promising to come
and pay you a visit, that he may see the house my father lived and died
in." "Indeed, child," replied the mother, "your father had no brother,
nor have you an uncle."

The next day the magician found Aladdin playing in another part of the
town, and embracing him as before, put two pieces of gold into his hand,
and said to him, "Carry this, child, to your mother; tell her that I
will come and see her to-night, and bid her get us something for supper;
but first show ms the house where you live."

Aladdin showed the African magician the house, and carried the two
pieces of gold to his mother, who went out and bought provisions; and
considering she wanted various utensils, borrowed them of her
neighbours. She spent the whole day in preparing the supper; and at
night, when it was ready, said to her son, "Perhaps the stranger knows
not how to find our house; go and bring him, if you meet with him."

Aladdin was just ready to go, when the magician knocked at the door, and
came in loaded with wine and all sorts of fruits, which he brought for a
dessert. After he had given what he brought into Aladdin's hands, he
saluted his mother, and desired her to show him the place where his
brother Mustapha used to sit on the sofa; and when she had so done, he
fell down and kissed it several times, crying out, with tears in his
eyes, "My poor brother! how unhappy am I, not to have come soon enough
to give you one last embrace." Aladdin's mother desired him to sit down
in the same place, but he declined. "No," said he, "I shall not do that;
but give me leave to sit opposite to it, that although I see not the
master of a family so dear to me, I may at least behold the place where
he used to sit."

When the magician had made choice of a place, and sat down, he began to
enter into discourse with Aladdin's mother. "My good sister," said he,
"do not be surprised at your never having seen me all the time you have
been married to my brother Mustapha of happy memory. I have been forty
years absent from this country, which is my native place, as well as my
late brother's; and during that time have travelled into the Indies,
Persia, Arabia, Syria, and Egypt, and afterward crossed over into
Africa, where I took up my abode. At last, as it is natural for a man, I
was desirous to see my native country again, and to embrace my dear
brother; and finding I had strength enough to undertake so long a
journey, I made the necessary preparations, and set out. Nothing ever
afflicted me so much as hearing of my brother's death. But God be
praised for all things! It is a comfort for me to find, as it were, my
brother in a son, who has his most remarkable features."

The African magician perceiving that the widow wept at the remembrance
of her husband, changed the conversation, and turning toward her son,
asked him, "What business do you follow? Are you of any trade?"

At this question the youth hung down his head, and was not a little
abashed when his mother answered "Aladdin is an idle fellow. His father,
when alive, strove all he could to teach him his trade, but could not
succeed; and since his death, notwithstanding all I can say to him, he
does nothing but idle away his time in the streets, as you saw him,
without considering he is no longer a child; and if you do not make him
ashamed of it, I despair of his ever coming to any good. For my part, I
am resolved, one of these days, to turn him out of doors, and let him
provide for himself."

After these words, Aladdin's mother burst into tears; and the magician
said, "This is not well, nephew; you must think of helping yourself, and
getting your livelihood. There are many sorts of trades; perhaps you do
not like your father's, and would prefer another; I will endeavour to
help you. If you have no mind to learn any handicraft, I will take a
shop for you, furnish it with all sorts of fine stuffs and linens; and
then with the money you make of them you can lay in fresh goods, and
live in an honourable way. Tell me freely what you think of my proposal;
you shall always find me ready to keep my word."

This plan just suited Aladdin, who hated work. He told the magician he
had a greater inclination to that business than to any other, and that
he should be much obliged to him for his kindness. "Well then," said the
African magician, "I will carry you with me to-morrow, clothe you as
handsomely as the best merchants in the city, and afterward we will open
a shop as I mentioned."

The widow, after his promises of kindness to her son, no longer doubted
that the magician was her husband's brother. She thanked him for his
good intentions; and after having exhorted Aladdin to render himself
worthy of his uncle's favour, served up supper, at which they talked of
several indifferent matters; and then the magician took his leave and
retired.

He came again the next day, as he had promised, and took Aladdin with
him to a merchant, who sold all sorts of clothes for different ages and
ranks, ready made, and a variety of fine stuffs, and bade Aladdin choose
those he preferred, which he paid for.

When Aladdin found himself so handsomely equipped, he returned his uncle
thanks, who thus addressed him: "As you are soon to be a merchant, it is
proper you should frequent these shops, and be acquainted with them." He
then showed him the largest and finest mosques, carried him to the khans
or inns where the merchants and travellers lodged, and afterward to the
sultan's palace, where he had free access; and at last brought him to
his own khan, where, meeting with some merchants he had become
acquainted with since his arrival, he gave them a treat, to bring them
and his pretended nephew acquainted.

This entertainment lasted till night, when Aladdin would have taken
leave of his uncle to go home; the magician would not let him go by
himself, but conducted him to his mother, who, as soon as she saw him so
well dressed, was transported with joy, and bestowed a thousand
blessings upon the magician.

Early the next morning the magician called again for Aladdin, and said
he would take him to spend that day in the country, and on the next he
would purchase the shop. He then led him out at one of the gates of the
city, to some magnificent palaces, to each of which belonged beautiful
gardens, into which anybody might enter. At every building he came to,
he asked Aladdin if he did not think it fine; and the youth was ready to
answer when any one presented itself, crying out, "Here is a finer
house, uncle, than any we have yet seen," By this artifice, the cunning
magician led Aladdin some way into the country; and as he meant to carry
him farther, to execute his design, he took an opportunity to sit down
in one of the gardens, on the brink of a fountain of clear water, which
discharged itself by a lion's mouth of bronze into a basin, pretending
to be tired: "Come, nephew," said he, "you must be weary as well as I;
let us rest ourselves, and we shall be better able to pursue our walk."




The magician next pulled from his girdle a handkerchief with cakes and
fruit, and during this short repast he exhorted his nephew to leave off
bad company, and to seek that of wise and prudent men, to improve by
their conversation; "for," said he, "you will soon be at man's estate,
and you cannot too early begin to imitate their example." When they had
eaten as much as they liked, they got up, and pursued their walk through
gardens separated from one another only by small ditches, which marked
out the limits without interrupting the communication; so great was the
confidence the inhabitants reposed in each other. By this means the
African magician drew Aladdin insensibly beyond the gardens, and crossed
the country, till they nearly reached the mountains.

At last they arrived between two mountains of moderate height and equal
size, divided by a narrow valley, which was the place where the magician
intended to execute the design that had brought him from Africa to
China. "We will go no farther now," said he to Aladdin; "I will show you
here some extraordinary things, which, when you have seen, you will
thank me for: but while I strike a light, gather up all the loose dry
sticks you can see, to kindle a fire with."

Aladdin found so many dried sticks, that he soon collected a great heap.
The magician presently set them on fire; and when they were in a blaze,
threw in some incense, pronouncing several magical words, which Aladdin
did not understand.

He had scarcely done so when the earth opened just before the magician,
and discovered a stone with a brass ring fixed in it. Aladdin was so
frightened that he would have run away, but the magician caught hold of
him, and gave him such a box on the ear that he knocked him down.
Aladdin got up trembling, and with tears in his eyes said to the
magician, "What have I done, uncle, to be treated in this severe
manner?" "I am your uncle," answered the magician; "I supply the place
of your father, and you ought to make no reply. But child," added he,
softening, "do not be afraid; for I shall not ask anything of you, but
that you obey me punctually, if you would reap the advantages which I
intend you. Know, then, that under this stone there is hidden a
treasure, destined to be yours, and which will make you richer than the
greatest monarch in the world. No person but yourself is permitted to
lift this stone, or enter the cave; so you must punctually execute what
I may command, for it is a matter of great consequence both to you and
me."

Aladdin, amazed at all he saw and heard, forgot what was past, and
rising said, "Well, uncle, what is to be done? Command me, I am ready to
obey." "I am overjoyed, child," said the African magician, embracing
him, "Take hold of the ring, and lift up that stone." "Indeed, uncle,"
replied Aladdin, "I am not strong enough; you must help me." "You have
no occasion for my assistance," answered the magician; "if I help you,
we shall be able to do nothing. Take hold of the ring, and lift it up;
you will find it will come easily." Aladdin did as the magician bade
him, raised the stone with ease, and laid it on one side.

When the stone was pulled up, there appeared a staircase about three or
four feet deep, leading to a door. "Descend, my son," said the African
magician, "those steps, and open that door. It will lead you into a
palace, divided into three great halls. In each of these you will see
four large brass cisterns placed on each side, full of gold and silver;
but take care you do not meddle with them. Before you enter the first
hall, be sure to tuck up your robe, wrap it about you, and then pass
through the second into the third without stopping. Above all things,
have a care that you do not touch the walls so much as with your
clothes; for if you do, you will die instantly. At the end of the third
hall, you will find a door which opens into a garden, planted with fine
trees loaded with fruit. Walk directly across the garden to a terrace,
where you will see a niche before you, and in that niche a lighted lamp.
Take the lamp down and put it out. When you have thrown away the wick
and poured out the liquor, put it in your waistband and bring it to me.
Do not be afraid that the liquor will spoil your clothes, for it is not
oil, and the lamp will be dry as soon as it is thrown out."

After these words the magician drew a ring off his finger, and put it on
one of Aladdin's, saying, "It is a talisman against all evil, so long as
you obey me. Go, therefore, boldly, and we shall both be rich all our
lives."

Aladdin descended the steps, and, opening the door, found the three
halls just as the African magician had described. He went through them
with all the precaution the fear of death could inspire, crossed the
garden without stopping, took down the lamp from the niche, threw out
the wick and the liquor, and, as the magician had desired, put it in his
waistband. But as he came down from the terrace, seeing it was perfectly
dry, he stopped in the garden to observe the trees, which were loaded
with extraordinary fruit of different colours on each tree. Some bore
fruit entirely white, and some clear and transparent as crystal; some
pale red, and others deeper; some green, blue, and purple, and others
yellow; in short, there was fruit of all colours. The white were pearls;
the clear and transparent, diamonds; the deep red, rubies; the paler,
balas rubies; the green, emeralds; the blue, turquoises; the purple,
amethysts; and the yellow, sapphires. Aladdin, ignorant of their value,
would have preferred figs, or grapes, or pomegranates; but as he had his
uncle's permission, he resolved to gather some of every sort. Having
filled the two new purses his uncle had bought for him with his clothes,
he wrapped some up in the skirts of his vest, and crammed his bosom as
full as it could hold.

Aladdin, having thus loaded himself with riches of which he knew not the
value, returned through the three halls with the utmost precaution, and
soon arrived at the mouth of the cave, where the African magician
awaited him with the utmost impatience. As soon as Aladdin saw him, he
cried out, "Pray, uncle, lend me your hand, to help me out." "Give me
the lamp first," replied the magician; "it will be troublesome to you,"
"Indeed, uncle," answered Aladdin, "I cannot now, but I will as soon as
I am up." The African magician was determined that he would have the
lamp before he would help him up; and Aladdin, who had encumbered
himself so much with his fruit that he could not well get at it, refused
to give it to him till he was out of the cave. The African magician,
provoked at this obstinate refusal, flew into a passion, threw a little
of his incense into the fire, and pronounced two magical words, when the
stone which had closed the mouth of the staircase moved into its place,
with the earth over it in the same manner as it lay at the arrival of
the magician and Aladdin.

This action of the magician plainly revealed to Aladdin that he was no
uncle of his, but one who designed him evil. The truth was that he had
learnt from his magic books the secret and the value of this wonderful
lamp, the owner of which would be made richer than any earthly ruler,
and hence his journey to China. His art had also told him that he was
not permitted to take it himself, but must receive it as a voluntary
gift from the hands of another person. Hence he employed young Aladdin,
and hoped by a mixture of kindness and authority to make him obedient to
his word and will. When he found that his attempt had failed, he set out
to return to Africa, but avoided the town, lest any person who had seen
him leave in company with Aladdin should make inquiries after the youth.
Aladdin being suddenly enveloped in darkness, cried, and called out to
his uncle to tell him he was ready to give him the lamp; but in vain,
since his cries could not be heard. He descended to the bottom of the
steps, with a design to get into the palace, but the door, which was
opened before by enchantment, was now shut by the same means. He then
redoubled his cries and tears, sat down on the steps without any hopes
of ever seeing light again, and in an expectation of passing from the
present darkness to a speedy death. In this great emergency he said,
"There is no strength or power but in the great and high God"; and in
joining his hands to pray he rubbed the ring which the magician had put
on his finger. Immediately a genie of frightful aspect appeared, and
said, "What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee. I serve him who
possesses the ring on thy finger; I, and the other slaves of that ring."




At another time Aladdin would have been frightened at the sight of so
extraordinary a figure, but the danger he was in made him answer without
hesitation, "Whoever thou art, deliver me from this place." He had no
sooner spoken these words, than he found himself on the very spot where
the magician had last left him, and no sign of cave or opening, nor
disturbance of the earth. Returning God thanks to find himself once more
in the world, he made the best of his way home. When he got within his
mother's door, the joy to see her and his weakness for want of
sustenance made him so faint that he remained for a long time as dead.
As soon as he recovered, he related to his mother all that had happened
to him, and they were both very vehement in their complaints of the
cruel magician. Aladdin slept very soundly till late the next morning,
when the first thing he said to his mother was, that he wanted something
to eat, and wished she would give him his breakfast. "Alas! child," said
she, "I have not a bit of bread to give you; you ate up all the
provisions I had in the house yesterday; but I have a little cotton
which I have spun; I will go and sell it, and buy bread and something
for our dinner." "Mother," replied Aladdin, "keep your cotton for
another time, and give me the lamp I brought home with me yesterday; I
will go and sell it, and the money I shall get for it will serve both
for breakfast and dinner, and perhaps supper too."

Aladdin's mother took the lamp and said to her son, "Here it is, but it
is very dirty; if it were a little cleaner I believe it would bring
something more." She took some fine sand and water to clean it; but had
no sooner begun to rub it, than in an instant a hideous genie of
gigantic size appeared before her, and said to her in a voice of
thunder, "What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave,
and the slave of all those who have that lamp in their hands; I and the
other slaves of the lamp."

Aladdin's mother, terrified at the sight of the genie, fainted; when
Aladdin, who had seen such a phantom in the cavern, snatched the lamp
out of his mother's hand, and said to the genie boldly, "I am hungry,
bring me something to eat." The genie disappeared immediately, and in an
instant returned with a large silver tray, holding twelve covered dishes
of the same metal, which contained the most delicious viands; six large
white bread cakes on two plates, two flagons of wine, and two silver
cups. All these he placed upon a carpet and disappeared; this was done
before Aladdin's mother recovered from her swoon.

Aladdin had fetched some water, and sprinkled it in her face to recover
her. Whether that or the smell of the meat effected her cure, it was not
long before she came to herself. "Mother," said Aladdin, "be not afraid:
get up and eat; here is what will put you in heart, and at the same time
satisfy my extreme hunger."

His mother was much surprised to see the great tray, twelve dishes, six
loaves, the two flagons and cups, and to smell the savoury odour which
exhaled from the dishes. "Child," said she, "to whom are we obliged for
this great plenty and liberality? Has the sultan been made acquainted
with our poverty, and had compassion on us?" "It is no matter, mother,"
said Aladdin, "let us sit down and eat; for you have almost as much need
of a good breakfast as myself; when we have done, I will tell you."
Accordingly, both mother and son sat down and ate with the better relish
as the table was so well furnished. But all the time Aladdin's mother
could not forbear looking at and admiring the tray and dishes, though
she could not judge whether they were silver or any other metal, and the
novelty more than the value attracted her attention.

The mother and son sat at breakfast till it was dinner-time, and then
they thought it would be best to put the two meals together; yet, after
this they found they should have enough left for supper, and two meals
for the next day.

When Aladdin's mother had taken away and set by what was left, she went
and sat down by her son on the sofa, saying, "I expect now that you
should satisfy my impatience, and tell me exactly what passed between
the genie and you while I was in a swoon"; which he readily complied
with.

She was in as great amazement at what her son told her, as at the
appearance of the genie; and said to him, "But, son, what have we to do
with genies? I never heard that any of my acquaintance had ever seen
one. How came that vile genie to address himself to me, and not to you,
to whom he had appeared before in the cave?" "Mother," answered Aladdin,
"the genie you saw is not the one who appeared to me. If you remember,
he that I first saw called himself the slave of the ring on my finger;
and this you saw, called himself the slave of the lamp you had in your
hand; but I believe you did not hear him, for I think you fainted as
soon as he began to speak."

"What!" cried the mother, "was your lamp then the occasion of that
cursed genie's addressing himself rather to me than to you? Ah! my son,
take it out of my sight, and put it where you please. I had rather you
would sell it than run the hazard of being frightened to death again by
touching it; and if you would take my advice, you would part also with
the ring, and not have anything to do with genies, who, as our prophet
has told us, are only devils."

"With your leave, mother," replied Aladdin, "I shall now take care how I
sell a lamp which may be so serviceable both to you and me. That false
and wicked magician would not have undertaken so long a journey to
secure this wonderful lamp if he had not known its value to exceed that
of gold and silver. And since we have honestly come by it, let us make a
profitable use of it, without making any great show, and exciting the
envy and jealousy of our neighbours. However, since the genies frighten
you so much, I will take it out of your sight, and put it where I may
find it when I want it. The ring I cannot resolve to part with; for
without that you had never seen me again; and though I am alive now,
perhaps, if it were gone, I might not be so some moments hence;
therefore, I hope you will give me leave to keep it, and to wear it
always on my finger." Aladdin's mother replied that he might do what he
pleased; for her part, she would have nothing to do with genies, and
never say anything more about them.

By the next night they had eaten all the provisions the genie had
brought; and the next day Aladdin, who could not bear the thoughts of
hunger, putting one of the silver dishes tinder his vest, went out early
to sell it, and addressing himself to a Jew whom he met in the streets,
took him aside, and pulling out the plate, asked him if he would buy it.
The cunning Jew took the dish, examined it, and as soon as he found that
it was good silver, asked Aladdin at how much he valued it. Aladdin, who
had never been used to such traffic, told him he would trust to his
judgment and honour. The Jew was somewhat confounded at this plain
dealing; and doubting whether Aladdin understood the material or the
full value of what he offered to sell, took a piece of gold out of his
purse and gave it him, though it was but the sixtieth part of the worth
of the plate. Aladdin, taking the money very eagerly, retired with so
much haste, that the Jew, not content with the exorbitancy of his
profit, was vexed he had not penetrated into his ignorance, and was
going to run after him, to endeavour to get some change out of the piece
of gold; but he ran so fast, and had got so far, that it would have been
impossible for him to overtake him.

Before Aladdin went home, he called at a baker's, bought some cakes of
bread, changed his money, and on his return gave the rest to his mother,
who went and purchased provisions enough to last them some time. After
this manner they lived, till Aladdin had sold the twelve dishes singly,
as necessity pressed, to the Jew, for the same money; who, after the
first time, durst not offer him less, for fear of losing so good a
bargain. When he had sold the last dish, he had recourse to the tray,
which weighed ten times as much as the dishes, and would have carried it
to his old purchaser, but that it was too large and cumbersome;
therefore he was obliged to bring him home with him to his mother's,
where, after the Jew had examined the weight of the tray, he laid down
ten pieces of gold, with which Aladdin was very well satisfied.

When all the money was spent, Aladdin had recourse again to the lamp. He
took it in his hands, looked for the part where his mother had rubbed it
with the sand, rubbed it also, when the genie immediately appeared, and
said, "What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave, and
the slave of all those who have that lamp in their hands; I, and the
other slaves of the lamp." "I am hungry," said Aladdin, "bring me
something to eat." The genie disappeared, and presently returned with a
tray, the same number of covered dishes as before, set them down, and
vanished.

As soon as Aladdin found that their provisions were again expended, he
took one of the dishes, and went to look for his Jew chapman; but
passing by a goldsmith's shop, the goldsmith perceiving him, called to
him, and said, "My lad, I imagine that you have something to sell to the
Jew, whom I often see you visit; but perhaps you do not know that he is
the greatest rogue even among the Jews. I will give you the full worth
of what you have to sell, or I will direct you to other merchants who
will not cheat you."

This offer induced Aladdin to pull his plate from tinder his vest and
show it to the goldsmith; who at first sight saw that it was made of the
finest silver, and asked him if he had sold such as that to the Jew;
when Aladdin told him that he had sold him twelve such, for a piece of
gold each. "What a villain!" cried the goldsmith. "But," added he, "my
son, what is past cannot be recalled. By showing you the value of this
plate, which is of the finest silver we use in our shops, I will let you
see how much the Jew has cheated you."

The goldsmith took a pair of scales, weighed the dish, and assured him
that his plate would fetch by weight sixty pieces of gold, which he
offered to pay down immediately.

Aladdin thanked him for his fair dealing, and never after went to any
other person.

Though Aladdin and his mother had an inexhaustible treasure in their
lamp, and might have had whatever they wished for, yet they lived with
the same frugality as before, and it may easily be supposed that the
money for which Aladdin had sold the dishes and tray was sufficient to
maintain them some time.

During this interval, Aladdin frequented the shops of the principal
merchants, where they sold cloth of gold and silver, linens, silk
stuffs, and jewellery, and, oftentimes joining in their conversation,
acquired a knowledge of the world, and a desire to improve himself. By
his acquaintance among the jewellers, he came to know that the fruits
which he had gathered when he took the lamp were, instead of coloured
glass, stones of inestimable value; but he had the prudence not to
mention this to any one, not even to his mother.

One day as Aladdin was walking about the town, he heard an order
proclaimed, commanding the people to shut up their shops and houses, and
keep within doors while the Princess Buddir al Buddoor, the sultan's
daughter, went to the bath and returned.

This proclamation inspired Aladdin with eager desire to see the
princess's face, which he determined to gratify, by placing himself
behind the door of the bath, so that he could not fail to see her face.

Aladdin had not long concealed himself before the princess came. She was
attended by a great crowd of ladies, slaves, and mutes, who walked on
each side and behind her. When she came within three or four paces of
the door of the bath, she took off her veil, and gave Aladdin an
opportunity of a full view of her face.

The princess was a noted beauty: her eyes were large, lively, and
sparkling; her smile bewitching; her nose faultless; her mouth small;
her lips vermilion. It is not therefore surprising that Aladdin, who had
never before seen such a blaze of charms, was dazzled and enchanted.

After the princess had passed by, and entered the bath, Aladdin quitted
his hiding-place, and went home. His mother perceived him to be more
thoughtful and melancholy than usual; and asked what had happened to
make him so, or if he was ill. He then told his mother all his
adventure, and concluded by declaring, "I love the princess more than I
can express, and am resolved that I will ask her in marriage of the
sultan."

Aladdin's mother listened with surprise to what her son told her; but
when he talked of asking the princess in marriage, she laughed aloud.
"Alas! child," said she, "what are you thinking of? You must be mad to
talk thus."

"I assure you, mother," replied Aladdin, "that I am not mad, but in my
right senses. I foresaw that you would reproach me with folly and
extravagance; but I must tell you once more, that I am resolved to
demand the princess of the sultan in marriage; nor do I despair of
success. I have the slaves of the lamp and of the ring to help me, and
you know how powerful their aid is. And I have another secret to tell
you: those pieces of glass, which I got from the trees in the garden of
the subterranean palace, are jewels of inestimable value, and fit fit
for the greatest monarchs. All the precious stones the jewellers have in
Bagdad are not to be compared to mine for size or beauty; and I am sure
that the offer of them will secure the favour of the sultan. You have a
large porcelain dish fit to hold them; fetch it, and let us see how they
will look, when we have arranged them according to their different
colours."

Aladdin's mother brought the china dish, when he took the jewels out of
the two purses in which he had kept them, and placed them in order,
according to his fancy. But the brightness and lustre they emitted in
the daytime, and the variety of the colours, so dazzled the eyes both of
mother and son, that they were astonished beyond measure. Aladdin's
mother, emboldened by the sight of these rich jewels, and fearful lest
her son should be guilty of greater extravagance, complied with his
request, and promised to go early in the next morning to the palace of
the sultan. Aladdin rose before daybreak, awakened his mother, pressing
her to go to the sultan's palace, and to get admittance, if possible,
before the grand vizier, the other viziers, and the great officers of
state went in to take their seats in the divan, where the sultan always
attended in person.

Aladdin's mother took the china dish, in which they had put the jewels
the day before, wrapped it in two fine napkins, and set forward for the
sultan's palace. When she came to the gates, the grand vizier, the other
viziers, and most distinguished lords of the court were just gone in;
but notwithstanding the crowd of people was great, she got into the
divan, a spacious hall, the entrance into which was very magnificent.
She placed herself just before the sultan, grand vizier, and the great
lords, who sat in council, on his right and left hand. Several causes
were called, according to their order, pleaded and adjudged, until the
time the divan generally broke up, when the sultan, rising, returned to
his apartment, attended by the grand vizier; the other viziers and
ministers of state then retired, as also did all those whose business
had called them thither.

Aladdin's mother, seeing the sultan retire, and all the people depart,
judged rightly that he would not sit again that day, and resolved to go
home; and on her arrival said, with much simplicity, "Son, I have seen
the sultan, and am very well persuaded he has seen me, too, for I placed
myself just before him; but he was so much taken up with those who
attended on all sides of him that I pitied him, and wondered at his
patience. At last I believe he was heartily tired, for he rose up
suddenly, and would not hear a great many who were ready prepared to
speak to him, but went away, at which I was well pleased, for indeed I
began to lose all patience, and was extremely fatigued with staying so
long. But there is no harm done; I will go again to-morrow; perhaps the
sultan may not be so busy."

The next morning she repaired to the sultan's palace with the present,
as early as the day before; but when she came there, she found the gates
of the divan shut. She went six times afterward on the days appointed,
placed herself always directly before the sultan, but with as little
success as the first morning.

On the sixth day, however, after the divan was broken up, when the
sultan returned to his own apartment, he said to his grand vizier; "I
have for some time observed a certain woman, who attends constantly
every day that I give audience, with something wrapped up in a napkin;
she always stands up from the beginning to the breaking up of the
audience, and affects to place herself just before me. If this woman
comes to our next audience, do not fail to call her, that I may hear
what she has to say." The grand vizier made answer by lowering his hand,
and then lifting it up above his head, signifying his willingness to
lose it if he failed.

On the next audience day, when Aladdin's mother went to the divan, and
placed herself in front of the sultan as usual, the grand vizier
immediately called the chief of the mace-bearers, and pointing to her
bade him bring her before the sultan. The old woman at once followed the
mace-bearer, and when she reached the sultan bowed her head down to the
carpet which covered the platform of the throne, and remained in that
posture until he bade her rise, which she had no sooner done, than he
said to her, "Good woman, I have observed you to stand many days from
the beginning to the rising of the divan; what business brings you
here?"

After these words, Aladdin's mother prostrated herself a second time;
and when she arose, said, "Monarch of monarchs, I beg of you to pardon
the boldness of my petition, and to assure me of your pardon and
forgiveness." "Well," replied the sultan, "I will forgive you, be it
what it may, and no hurt shall come to you; speak boldly."

When Aladdin's mother had taken all these precautions, for fear of the
sultan's anger, she told him faithfully the errand on which her son had
sent her, and the event which led to his making so bold a request in
spite of all her remonstrances.

The sultan hearkened to this discourse without showing the least anger;
but before he gave her any answer, asked her what she had brought tied
up in the napkin. She took the china dish which she had set down at the
foot of the throne, untied it, and presented it to the sultan.

The sultan's amazement and surprise were inexpressible, when he saw so
many large, beautiful and valuable jewels collected in the dish. He
remained for some time lost in admiration. At last, when he had
recovered himself, he received the present from Aladdin's mother's hand;
saying, "How rich, how beautiful!" After he had admired and handled all
the jewels one after another, he turned to his grand vizier, and showing
him the dish, said, "Behold, admire, wonder! and confess that your eyes
never beheld jewels so rich and beautiful before." The vizier was
charmed. "Well," continued the sultan, "what sayest thou to such a
present? Is it not worthy of the princess my daughter? And ought I not
to bestow her on one who values her at so great a price?" "I cannot but
own," replied the grand vizier, "that the present is worthy of the
princess; but I beg of your majesty to grant me three months before you
come to a final resolution. I hope, before that time, my son, whom you
have regarded with your favour, will be able to make a nobler present
than this Aladdin, who is an entire stranger to your majesty."

The sultan granted his request, and he said to the old woman, "Good
woman, go home, and tell your son that I agree to the proposal you have
made me; but I cannot marry the princess my daughter for three months;
at the expiration of that time come again."

Aladdin's mother returned home much more gratified than she had
expected, and told her son with much joy the condescending answer she
had received from the sultan's own mouth; and that she was to come to
the divan again that day three months.

Aladdin thought himself the most happy of all men at hearing this news,
and thanked his mother for the pains she had taken in the affair, the
good success of which was of so great importance to his peace, that he
counted every day, week, and even hour as it passed. When two of the
three months were passed, his mother one evening, having no oil in the
house, went out to buy some, and found a general rejoicing--the houses
dressed with foliage, silks, and carpeting, and every one striving to
show their joy according to their ability. The streets were crowded with
officers in habits of ceremony, mounted on horses richly caparisoned,
each attended by a great many footmen. Aladdin's mother asked the oil
merchant what was the meaning of all this preparation of public
festivity. "Whence came you, good woman," said he, "that you don't know
that the grand vizier's son is to marry the Princess Buddir al Buddoor,
the sultan's daughter, to-night? She will presently return from the
bath; and these officers whom you see are to assist at the cavalcade to
the palace, where the ceremony is to be solemnised."

Aladdin's mother, on hearing these news, ran home very quickly. "Child,"
cried she, "you are undone! the sultan's fine promises will come to
nought. This night the grand vizier's son is to marry the Princess
Buddir al Buddoor."

At this account, Aladdin was thunderstruck, and he bethought himself of
the lamp, and of the genie who had promised to obey him; and without
indulging in idle words against the sultan, the vizier, or his son, he
determined, if possible, to prevent the marriage.

When Aladdin had got into his chamber, he took the lamp, rubbed it in
the same place as before, when immediately the genie appeared, and said
to him, "What wouldst thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave;
I, and the other slaves of the lamp." "Hear me," said Aladdin; "thou
hast hitherto obeyed me, but now I am about to impose on thee a harder
task. The sultan's daughter, who was promised me as my bride, is this
night married to the son of the grand vizier. Bring them both hither to
me immediately they retire to their bedchamber."

"Master," replied the genie, "I obey you."

Aladdin supped with his mother as was their wont, and then went to his
own apartment, and sat up to await the return of the genie, according to
his commands.

In the mean time the festivities in honour of the princess's marriage
were conducted in the sultan's palace with great magnificence. The
ceremonies were at last brought to a conclusion, and the princess and
the son of the vizier retired to the bedchamber prepared for them. No
sooner had they entered it, and dismissed their attendants, than the
genie, the faithful slave of the lamp, to the great amazement and alarm
of the bride and bridegroom, took up the bed, and by an agency invisible
to them, transported it in an instant into Aladdin's chamber, where he
set it down. "Remove the bridegroom," said Aladdin to the genie, "and
keep him a prisoner till to-morrow dawn, and then return with him here."
On Aladdin being left alone with the princess, he endeavoured to assuage
her fears, and explained to her the treachery practiced upon him by the
sultan her father. He then laid himself down beside her, putting a drawn
scimitar between them, to show that he was determined to secure her
safety, and to treat her with the utmost possible respect. At break of
day, the genie appeared at the appointed hour, bringing back the
bridegroom, whom by breathing upon he had left motionless and entranced
at the door of Aladdin's chamber during the night, and at Aladdin's
command transported the couch with the bride and bridegroom on it, by
the same invisible agency, into the palace of the sultan.

At the instant that the genie had set down the couch with the bride and
bridegroom in their own chamber, the sultan came to the door to offer
his good wishes to his daughter. The grand vizier's son, who was almost
perished with cold, by standing in his thin under-garment all night, no
sooner heard the knocking at the door than he got out of bed, and ran
into the robing-chamber, where he had undressed himself the night
before.

The sultan having opened the door, went to the bedside, kissed the
princess on the forehead, but was extremely surprised to see her look so
melancholy. She only cast at him a sorrowful look, expressive of great
affliction. He suspected there was something extraordinary in this
silence, and thereupon went immediately to the sultaness's apartment,
told her in what a state he found the princess, and how she had received
him. "Sire," said the sultaness, "I will go and see her; she will not
receive me in the same manner."

The princess received her mother with sighs and tears, and signs of deep
dejection. At last, upon her pressing on her the duty of telling her all
her thoughts, she gave to the sultaness a precise description of all
that happened to her during the night; on which the sultaness enjoined
on her the necessity of silence and discretion, as no one would give
credence to so strange a tale. The grand vizier's son, elated with the
honour of being the sultan's son-in-law, kept silence on his part, and
the events of the night were not allowed to cast the least gloom on the
festivities on the following day, in continued celebration of the royal
marriage.

When night came, the bride and bridegroom were again attended to their
chamber with the same ceremonies as on the preceding evening. Aladdin,
knowing that this would be so, had already given his commands to the
genie of the lamp; and no sooner were they alone than their bed was
removed in the same mysterious manner as on the preceding evening; and
having passed the night in the same unpleasant way, they were in the
morning conveyed to the palace of the sultan. Scarcely had they been
replaced in their apartment, when the sultan came to make his
compliments to his daughter, when the princess could no longer conceal
from him the unhappy treatment she had been subject to, and told him all
that had happened as she had already related it to her mother. The
sultan, on hearing these strange tidings, consulted with the grand
vizier; and finding from him that his son had been subjected to even
worse treatment by an invisible agency, he determined to declare the
marriage to be cancelled, and all the festivities, which were yet to
last for several days, to be countermanded and terminated.

This sudden change in the mind of the sultan gave rise to various
speculations and reports. Nobody but Aladdin knew the secret, and he
kept it with the most scrupulous silence; and neither the sultan nor the
grand vizier, who had forgotten Aladdin and his request, had the least
thought that he had any hand in the strange adventures that befell the
bride and bridegroom.

On the very day that the three months contained in the sultan's promise
expired, the mother of Aladdin again went to the palace, and stood in
the same place in the divan. The sultan knew her again, and directed his
vizier to have her brought before him.

After having prostrated herself, she made answer, in reply to the
sultan: "Sire, I come at the end of three months to ask of you the
fulfillment of the promise you made to my son." The sultan little
thought the request of Aladdin's mother was made to him in earnest, or
that he would hear any more of the matter. He therefore took counsel
with his vizier, who suggested that the sultan should attach such
conditions to the marriage that no one of the humble condition of
Aladdin could possibly fulfill. In accordance with this suggestion of
the vizier, the sultan replied to the mother of Aladdin: "Good woman, it
is true sultans ought to abide by their word, and I am ready to keep
mine, by making your son happy in marriage with the princess my
daughter. But as I cannot marry her without some further proof of your
son being able to support her in royal state, you may tell him I will
fulfill my promise as soon as he shall send me forty trays of massy
gold, full of the same sort of jewels you have already made me a present
of, and carried by the like number of black slaves, who shall be led by
as many young and handsome white slaves, all dressed magnificently. On
these conditions I am ready to bestow the princess my daughter upon him;
therefore, good woman, go and tell him so, and I will wait till you
bring me his answer."

Aladdin's mother prostrated herself a second time before the sultan's
throne, and retired. On her way home, she laughed within herself at her
son's foolish imagination. "Where," said she, "can he get so many large
gold trays, and such precious stones to fill them? It is altogether out
of his power, and I believe he will not be much pleased with my embassy
this time." When she came home, full of these thoughts, she told Aladdin
all the circumstances of her interview with the sultan, and the
conditions on which he consented to the marriage. "The sultan expects
your answer immediately," said she; and then added, laughing, "I believe
he may wait long enough!"

"Not so long, mother, as you imagine," replied Aladdin, "This demand is
a mere trifle, and will prove no bar to my marriage with the princess. I
will prepare at once to satisfy his request."

Aladdin retired to his own apartment and summoned the genie of the lamp,
and required him to prepare and present the gift immediately, before the
sultan closed his morning audience, according to the terms in which it
had been prescribed. The genie professed his obedience to the owner of
the lamp, and disappeared. Within a very short time, a train of forty
black slaves, led by the same number of white slaves, appeared opposite
the house in which Aladdin lived. Each black slave carried on his head a
basin of massy gold, full of pearls, diamonds, rubies, and emeralds.
Aladdin then addressed his mother: "Madam, pray lose no time; before the
sultan and the divan rise, I would have you return to the palace with
this present as the dowry demanded for the princess, that he may judge
by my diligence and exactness of the ardent and sincere desire I have to
procure myself the honour of this alliance."

As soon as this magnificent procession, with Aladdin's mother at its
head, had begun to march from Aladdin's house, the whole city was filled
with the crowds of people desirous to see so grand a sight. The graceful
bearing, elegant form, and wonderful likeness of each slave; their grave
walk at an equal distance from each other, the lustre of their jewelled
girdles, and the brilliancy of the aigrettes of precious stones in their
turbans, excited the greatest admiration in the spectators. As they had
to pass through several streets to the palace, the whole length of the
way was lined with files of spectators. Nothing, indeed, was ever seen
so beautiful and brilliant in the sultan's palace, and the richest robes
of the emirs of his court were not to be compared to the costly dresses
of these slaves, whom they supposed to be kings.

As the sultan, who had been informed of their approach, had given orders
for them to be admitted, they met with no obstacle, but went into the
divan in regular order, one part turning to the right and the other to
the left. After they were all entered, and had formed a semicircle
before the sultan's throne, the black slaves laid the golden trays on
the carpet, prostrated themselves, touching the carpet with their
foreheads, and at the same time the white slaves did the same. When they
rose, the black slaves uncovered the trays, and then all stood with
their arms crossed over their breasts.

In the mean time, Aladdin's mother advanced to the foot of the throne,
and having prostrated herself, said to the sultan, "Sire, my son knows
this present is much below the notice of Princess Buddir al Buddoor; but
hopes, nevertheless, that your majesty will accept of it, and make it
agreeable to the princess, and with the greater confidence since he has
endeavoured to conform to the conditions you were pleased to impose."

The sultan, overpowered at the sight of such more than royal
magnificence, replied without hesitation to the words of Aladdin's
mother: "Go and tell your son that I wait with open arms to embrace him;
and the more haste he makes to come and receive the princess my daughter
from my hands, the greater pleasure he will do me." As soon as Aladdin's
mother had retired, the sultan put an end to the audience; and rising
from his throne ordered that the princess's attendants should come and
carry the trays into their mistress's apartment, whither he went himself
to examine them with her at his leisure. The fourscore slaves were
conducted into the palace; and the sultan, telling the princess of their
magnificent apparel, ordered them to be brought before her apartment,
that she might see through the lattices he had not exaggerated in his
account of them.

In the meantime Aladdin's mother reached home, and showed in her air and
countenance the good news she brought to her son. "My son," said she,
"you may rejoice you are arrived at the height of your desires. The
sultan has declared that you shall marry the Princess Buddir al Buddoor.
He waits for you with impatience."

Aladdin, enraptured with this news, made his mother very little reply,
but retired to his chamber. There he rubbed his lamp, and the obedient
genie appeared. "Genie," said Aladdin, "convey me at once to a bath, and
supply me with the richest and most magnificent robe ever worn by a
monarch." No sooner were the words out of his mouth than the genie
rendered him, as well as himself, invisible, and transported him into a
bath of the finest marble of all sorts of colours; where he was
undressed, without seeing by whom, in a magnificent and spacious hall.
He was then well rubbed and washed with various scented waters. After he
had passed through several degrees of heat, he came out quite a
different man from what he was before. His skin was clear as that of a
child, his body lightsome and free; and when he returned into the hall,
he found, instead of his own poor raiment, a robe, the magnificence of
which astonished him. The genie helped him to dress, and when he had
done, transported him back to his own chamber, where he asked him if he
had any other commands. "Yes," answered Aladdin, "bring me a charger
that surpasses in beauty and goodness the best in the sultan's stables;
with a saddle, bridle, and other caparisons to correspond with his
value. Furnish also twenty slaves, as richly clothed as those who
carried the present to the sultan, to walk by my side and follow me, and
twenty more to go before me in two ranks. Besides these, bring my mother
six women slaves to attend her, as richly dressed at least as any of the
Princess Buddir al Buddoor's, each carrying a complete dress fit for any
sultaness. I want also ten thousand pieces of gold in ten purses; go,
and make haste."

As soon as Aladdin had given these orders, the genie disappeared, but
presently returned with the horse, the forty slaves, ten of whom carried
each a purse containing ten thousand pieces of gold, and six women
slaves, each carrying on her head a different dress for Aladdin's
mother, wrapt up in a piece of silver tissue, and presented them all to
Aladdin.

He presented the six women slaves to his mother, telling her they were
her slaves, and that the dresses they had brought were for her use. Of
the ten purses Aladdin took four, which he gave to his mother, telling
her, those were to supply her with necessaries; the other six he left in
the hands of the slaves who brought them, with an order to throw them by
handfuls among the people as they went to the sultan's palace. The six
slaves who carried the purses he ordered likewise to march before him,
three on the right hand and three on the left.

When Aladdin had thus prepared himself for his first interview with the
sultan, he dismissed the genie, and immediately mounting his charger,
began his march, and though he never was on horseback before, appeared
with a grace the most experienced horseman might envy. The innumerable
concourse of people through whom he passed made the air echo with their
acclamations, especially every time the six slaves who carried the
purses threw handfuls of gold among the populace.

On Aladdin's arrival at the palace, the sultan was surprised to find him
more richly and magnificently robed than he had ever been himself, and
was impressed with his good looks and dignity of manner, which were so
different from what he expected in the son of one so humble as Aladdin's
mother. He embraced him with all the demonstrations of joy, and when he
would have fallen at his feet, held him by the hand, and made him sit
near his throne. He shortly after led him amidst the sounds of trumpets,
hautboys, and all kinds of music, to a magnificent entertainment, at
which the sultan and Aladdin ate by themselves, and the great lords of
the court, according to their rank and dignity, sat at different tables.
After the feast, the sultan sent for the chief cadi, and commanded him
to draw up a contract of marriage between the Princess Buddir al Buddoor
and Aladdin. When the contract had been drawn, the sultan asked Aladdin
if he would stay in the palace and complete the ceremonies of the
marriage that day. "Sire," said Aladdin, "though great is my impatience
to enter on the honour granted me by your majesty, yet I beg you to
permit me first to build a palace worthy to receive the princess your
daughter. I pray you to grant me sufficient ground near your palace, and
I will have it completed with the utmost expedition." The sultan granted
Aladdin his request, and again embraced him. After which he took his
leave with as much politeness as if he had been bred up and had always
lived at court.

Aladdin returned home in the order he had come, amidst the acclamations
of the people, who wished him all happiness and prosperity. As soon as
he dismounted, he retired to his own chamber, took the lamp, and
summoned the genie as usual, who professed his allegiance. "Genie," said
Aladdin, "build me a palace fit to receive the Princess Buddir al
Buddoor. Let its materials be made of nothing less than porphyry,
jasper, agate, lapis lazuli, and the finest marble. Let its walls be
massive gold and silver bricks laid alternately. Let each front contain
six windows, and let the lattices of these (except one, which must be
left unfinished) be enriched with diamonds, rubies, and emeralds, so
that they shall exceed everything of the kind ever seen in the world.
Let there be an inner and outer court in front of the palace, and a
spacious garden; but above all things, provide a safe treasure-house,
and fill it with gold and silver. Let there be also kitchens and
storehouses, stables full of the finest horses, with their equerries and
grooms, and hunting equipage, officers, attendants, and slaves, both men
and women, to form a retinue for the princess and myself. Go and execute
my wishes."

When Aladdin gave these commands to the genie, the sun was set. The next
morning at daybreak the genie presented himself, and, having obtained
Aladdin's consent, transported him in a moment to the palace he had
made. The genie led him through all the apartments, where he found
officers and slaves, habited according to their rank and the services to
which they were appointed. The genie then showed him the treasury, which
was opened by a treasurer, where Aladdin saw large vases of different
sizes, piled up to the top with money, ranged all round the chamber. The
genie thence led him to the stables, where were some of the finest
horses in the world, and the grooms busy in dressing them; from thence
they went to the storehouses, which were filled with all things
necessary, both for food and ornament.

When Aladdin had examined every portion of the palace, and particularly
the hall with the four-and-twenty windows, and found it far to exceed
his fondest expectations, he said, "Genie, there is one thing wanting, a
fine carpet for the princess to walk upon from the sultan's palace to
mine. Lay one down immediately." The genie disappeared, and Aladdin saw
what he desired executed in an instant. The genie then returned, and
carried him to his own home.

When the sultan's porters came to open the gates, they were amazed to
find what had been an unoccupied garden filled up with a magnificent
palace, and a splendid carpet extending to it all the way from the
sultan's palace. They told the strange tidings to the grand vizier, who
informed the sultan, who exclaimed, "It must be Aladdin's palace, which
I gave him leave to build for my daughter. He has wished to surprise us,
and let us see what wonders can be done in only one night."

Aladdin, on his being conveyed by the genie to his own home, requested
his mother to go to the Princess Buddir al Buddoor, and tell her that
the palace would be ready for her reception in the evening. She went,
attended by her women slaves, in the same order as on the preceding day.
Shortly after her arrival at the princess's apartment, the sultan
himself came in, and was surprised to find her, whom he knew as his
suppliant at his divan in such humble guise, to be now more richly and
sumptuously attired than his own daughter. This gave him a higher
opinion of Aladdin, who took such care of his mother, and made her share
his wealth and honours. Shortly after her departure, Aladdin, mounting
his horse, and attended by his retinue of magnificent attendants, left
his paternal home forever, and went to the palace in the same pomp as on
the day before. Nor did he forget to take with him the Wonderful Lamp,
to which he owed all his good fortune, nor to wear the Ring which was
given him as a talisman. The sultan entertained Aladdin with the utmost
magnificence, and at night, on the conclusion of the marriage
ceremonies, the princess took leave of the sultan her father. Bands of
music led the procession, followed by a hundred state ushers, and the
like number of black mutes, in two files, with their officers at their
head. Four hundred of the sultan's young pages carried flambeaux on each
side, which, together with the illuminations of the sultan's and
Aladdin's palaces, made it as light as day. In this order the princess,
conveyed in her litter, and accompanied also by Aladdin's mother,
carried in a superb litter and attended by her women slaves, proceeded
on the carpet which was spread from the sultan's palace to that of
Aladdin. On her arrival Aladdin was ready to receive her at the
entrance, and led her into a large hall, illuminated with an infinite
number of wax candles, where a noble feast was served up. The dishes
were of massy gold, and contained the most delicate viands. The vases,
basins, and goblets were gold also, and of exquisite workmanship, and
all the other ornaments and embellishments of the hall were answerable
to this display. The princess, dazzled to see so much riches collected
in one place, said to Aladdin, "I thought, prince, that nothing in the
world was so beautiful as the sultan my father's palace, but the sight
of this hall alone is sufficient to show I was deceived."

When the supper was ended, there entered a company of female dancers,
who performed, according to the custom of the country, singing at the
same time verses in praise of the bride and bridegroom. About midnight
Aladdin's mother conducted the bride to the nuptial apartment, and he
soon after retired.

The next morning the attendants of Aladdin presented themselves to dress
him, and brought him another habit, as rich and magnificent as that worn
the day before. He then ordered one of the horses to be got ready,
mounted him, and went in the midst of a large troop of slaves to the
sultan's palace to entreat him to take a repast in the princess's
palace, attended by his grand vizier and all the lords of his court. The
sultan consented with pleasure, rose up immediately, and, preceded by
the principal officers of his palace, and followed by all the great
lords of his court, accompanied Aladdin.

The nearer the sultan approached Aladdin's palace, the more he was
struck with its beauty; but when he entered it, came into the hall, and
saw the windows, enriched with diamonds, rubies, emeralds, all large
perfect stones, he was completely surprised, and said to his son-in-law,
"This palace is one of the wonders of the world; for where in all the
world besides shall we find walls built of massy gold and silver, and
diamonds, rubies, and emeralds composing the windows? But what most
surprises me is, that a hall of this magnificence should be left with
one of its windows incomplete and unfinished." "Sire," answered Aladdin,
"the omission was by design, since I wished that you should have the
glory of finishing this hall." "I take your intention kindly," said the
sultan, "and will give orders about it immediately."

After the sultan had finished this magnificent entertainment, provided
for him and for his court by Aladdin, he was informed that the jewellers
and goldsmiths attended; upon which he returned to the hall, and showed
them the window which was unfinished. "I sent for you," said he, "to fit
up this window in as great perfection as the rest. Examine them well,
and make all the dispatch you can."

The jewellers and goldsmiths examined the three-and-twenty windows with
great attention, and after they had consulted together, to know what
each could furnish, they returned, and presented themselves before the
sultan, whose principal jeweller undertaking to speak for the rest,
said, "Sire, we are all willing to exert our utmost care and industry to
obey you; but among us all we cannot furnish jewels enough for so great
a work." "I have more than are necessary," said the sultan; "come to my
palace, and you shall choose what may answer your purpose."

When the sultan returned to his palace, he ordered his jewels to be
brought out, and the jewellers took a great quantity, particularly those
Aladdin had made him a present of, which they soon used, without making
any great advance in their work. They came again several times for more,
and in a month's time had not finished half their work. In short, they
used all the jewels the sultan had, and borrowed of the vizier, but yet
the work was not half done.

Aladdin, who knew that all the sultan's endeavours to make this window
like the rest were in vain, sent for the jewellers and goldsmiths, and
not only commanded them to desist from their work, but ordered them to
undo what they had begun, and to carry all their jewels back to the
sultan and to the vizier. They undid in a few hours what they had been
six weeks about, and retired, leaving Aladdin alone in the hall. He took
the lamp, which he carried about him, rubbed it, and presently the genie
appeared. "Genie," said Aladdin, "I ordered thee to leave one of the
four-and-twenty windows of this hall imperfect, and thou hast executed
my commands punctually; now I would have thee make it like the rest."
The genie immediately disappeared. Aladdin went out of the hall, and
returning soon after, found the window, as he wished it to be, like the
others.

In the mean time, the jewellers and goldsmiths repaired to the palace,
and were introduced into the sultan's presence; where the chief jeweller
presented the precious stones which he had brought back. The sultan
asked them if Aladdin had given them any reason for so doing, and they
answering that he had given them none, he ordered a horse to be brought,
which he mounted, and rode to his son-in-law's palace, with some few
attendants on foot, to inquire why he had ordered the completion of the
window to be stopped. Aladdin met him at the gate, and without giving
any reply to his inquiries conducted him to the grand saloon, where the
sultan, to his great surprise, found the window, which was left
imperfect, to correspond exactly with the others. He fancied at first
that he was mistaken, and examined the two windows on each side, and
afterward all the four-and-twenty; but when he was convinced that the
window which several workmen had been so long about was finished in so
short a time, he embraced Aladdin and kissed him between his eyes. "My
son," said he, "what a man you are to do such surprising things always
in the twinkling of an eye! there is not your fellow in the world; the
more I know, the more I admire you."

The sultan returned to the palace, and after this went frequently to the
window to contemplate and admire the wonderful palace of his son-in-law.

Aladdin did not confine himself in his palace, but went with much state,
sometimes to one mosque, and sometimes to another, to prayers, or to
visit the grand vizier or the principal lords of the court. Every time
he went out, he caused two slaves, who walked by the side of his horse,
to throw handfuls of money among the people as he passed through the
streets and squares. This generosity gained him the love and blessings
of the people, and it was common for them to swear by his head. Thus
Aladdin, while he paid all respect to the sultan, won by his affable
behaviour and liberality the affections of the people.

Aladdin had conducted himself in this manner several years, when the
African magician, who had for some years dismissed him from his
recollection, determined to inform himself with certainty whether he
perished, as he supposed, in the subterranean cave or not. After he had
resorted to a long course of magic ceremonies, and had formed a
horoscope by which to ascertain Aladdin's fate, what was his surprise to
find the appearances to declare that Aladdin, instead of dying in the
cave, had made his escape, and was living in royal splendour, by the aid
of the genie of the wonderful lamp!

On the very next day, the magician set out and travelled with the utmost
haste to the capital of China, where, on his arrival, he took up his
lodgings in a khan.

He then quickly learnt about the wealth, charities, happiness, and
splendid palace of Prince Aladdin. Directly he saw the wonderful fabric,
he knew that none but the genies, the slaves of the lamp, could have
performed such wonders, and, piqued to the quick at Aladdin's high
estate, he returned to the khan.

On his return he had recourse to an operation of geomancy to find out
where the lamp was--whether Aladdin carried it about with him, or where
he left it. The result of his consultation informed him, to his great
joy, that the lamp was in the palace. "Well," said he, rubbing his hands
in glee, "I shall have the lamp, and I shall make Aladdin return to his
original mean condition."

The next day the magician learnt, from the chief superintendent of the
khan where he lodged, that Aladdin had gone on a hunting expedition,
which was to last for eight days, of which only three had expired. The
magician wanted to know no more, He resolved at once on his plans. He
went to a coppersmith, and asked for a dozen copper lamps: the master of
the shop told him he had not so many by him, but if he would have
patience till the next day, he would have them ready. The magician
appointed his time, and desired him to take care that they should be
handsome and well polished.

The next day the magician called for the twelve lamps, paid the man his
full price, put them into a basket hanging on his arm, and went directly
to Aladdin's palace. As he approached, he began crying, "Who will
exchange old lamps for new ones?" As he went along, a crowd of children
collected, who hooted, and thought him, as did all who chanced to be
passing by, a madman or a fool, to offer to change new lamps for old
ones.

The African magician regarded not their scoffs, hootings, or all they
could say to him, but still continued crying, "Who will change old lamps
for new ones?" He repeated this so often, walking backward and forward
in front of the palace, that the princess, who was then in the hall with
the four-and-twenty windows, hearing a man cry something, and seeing a
great mob crowding about him, sent one of her women slaves to know what
he cried.

The slave returned, laughing so heartily that the princess rebuked her.
"Madam," answered the slave, laughing still, "who can forbear laughing,
to see an old man with a basket on his arm, full of fine new lamps,
asking to change them for old ones? the children and mob crowding about
him, so that he can hardly stir, make all the noise they can in derision
of him."

Another female slave hearing this, said, "Now you speak of lamps, I know
not whether the princess may have observed it, but there is an old one
upon a shelf of the Prince Aladdin's robing room, and whoever owns it
will not be sorry to find a new one in its stead. If the princess
chooses, she may have the pleasure of trying if this old man is so silly
as to give a new lamp for an old one, without taking anything for the
exchange."

The princess, who knew not the value of this lamp, and the interest that
Aladdin had to keep it safe, entered into the pleasantry, and commanded
a slave to take it and make the exchange. The slave obeyed, went out of
the hall, and no sooner got to the palace gates than he saw the African
magician, called to him, and showing him the old lamp, said, "Give me a
new lamp for this."

The magician never doubted but this was the lamp he wanted. There could
be no other such in this palace, where every utensil was gold or silver.
He snatched it eagerly out of the slave's hand, and thrusting it as far
as he could into his breast, offered him his basket, and bade him choose
which he liked best. The slave picked out one and carried it to the
princess; but the change was no sooner made than the place rung with the
shouts of the children, deriding the magician's folly.

The African magician stayed no longer near the palace, nor cried any
more, "New lamps for old ones," but made the best of his way to his
khan. His end was answered, and by his silence he got rid of the
children and the mob.

As soon as he was out of sight of the two palaces, he hastened down the
least-frequented streets; and having no more occasion for his lamps or
basket, set all down in a spot where nobody saw him; then going down
another street or two, he walked till he came to one of the city gates,
and pursuing his way through the suburbs, which were very extensive, at
length reached a lonely spot, where he stopped till the darkness of the
night, as the most suitable time for the design he had in contemplation.
When it became quite dark, he pulled the lamp out of his breast and
rubbed it. At that summons the genie appeared, and said, "What wouldst
thou have? I am ready to obey thee as thy slave, and the slave of all
those who have that lamp in their hands, both I and the other slaves of
the lamp." "I command thee," replied the magician, "to transport me
immediately, and the palace which thou and the other slaves of the lamp
have built in this city, with all the people in it, to Africa." The
genie made no reply, but with the assistance of the other genies, the
slaves of the lamp, immediately transported him and the palace, entire,
to the spot whither he had been desired to convey it.

Early the next morning, when the sultan, according to custom, went to
contemplate and admire Aladdin's place, his amazement was unbounded to
find that it could nowhere be seen. He could not comprehend how so large
a palace which he had seen plainly every day for some years, should
vanish so soon, and not leave the least remains behind. In his
perplexity he ordered the grand vizier to be sent for with expedition.

The grand vizier, who, in secret, bore no good will to Aladdin,
intimated his suspicion that the palace was built by magic, and that
Aladdin had made his hunting excursion an excuse for the removal of his
palace with the same suddenness with which it had been erected. He
induced the sultan to send a detachment of his guard, and to have
Aladdin seized as a prisoner of state. On his son-in-law being brought
before him, he would not hear a word from him, but ordered him to be put
to death. The decree caused so much discontent among the people, whose
affection Aladdin had secured by his largesses and charities, that the
sultan, fearful of an insurrection, was obliged to grant him his life.
When Aladdin found himself at liberty, he again addressed the sultan:
"Sire, I pray you to let me know the crime by which I have thus lost the
favour of thy countenance." "Your crime!" answered the sultan, "wretched
man! do you not know it? Follow me, and I will show you." The sultan
then took Aladdin into the apartment from whence he was wont to look at
and admire his palace, and said, "You ought to know where your palace
stood; look, mind, and tell me what has become of it." Aladdin did so,
and being utterly amazed at the loss of his palace, was speechless. At
last recovering himself, he said, "It is true, I do not see the palace.
It is vanished; but I had no concern in its removal. I beg you to give
me forty days, and if in that time I cannot restore it, I will offer my
head to be disposed of at your pleasure." "I give you the time you ask,
but at the end of the forty days, forget not to present yourself before
me."

Aladdin went out of the sultan's palace in a condition of exceeding
humiliation. The lords who had courted him in the days of his splendour,
now declined to have any communication with him. For three days he
wandered about the city, exciting the wonder and compassion of the
multitude by asking everybody he met if they had seen his palace, or
could tell him anything of it. On the third day he wandered into the
country, and as he was approaching a river, he fell down the bank with
so much violence that he rubbed the ring which the magician had given
him so hard by holding on the rock to save himself, that immediately the
same genie appeared whom he had seen in the cave where the magician had
left him. "What wouldst thou have?" said the genie, "I am ready to obey
thee as thy slave, and the slave of all those that have that ring on
their finger; both I and the other slaves of the ring."

Aladdin, agreeably surprised at an offer of help so little expected,
replied, "Genie, show me where the palace I caused to be built now
stands, or transport it back where it first stood." "Your command,"
answered the genie, "is not wholly in my power; I am only the slave of
the ring, and not of the lamp." "I command thee, then," replied Aladdin,
"by the power of the ring, to transport me to the spot where my palace
stands, in what part of the world soever it may be." These words were no
sooner out of his mouth, than the genie transported him into Africa, to
the midst of a large plain, where his palace stood, at no great distance
from a city, and placing him exactly under the window of the princess's
apartment, left him.

Now it so happened that shortly after Aladdin had been transported by
the slave of the ring to the neighbourhood of his palace, that one of
the attendants of the Princess Buddir al Buddoor, looking through the
window, perceived him and instantly told her mistress. The princess, who
could not believe the joyful tidings, hastened herself to the window,
and seeing Aladdin, immediately opened it. The noise of opening the
window made Aladdin turn his head that way, and perceiving the princess,
he saluted her with an air that expressed his joy. "To lose no time,"
said she to him, "I have sent to have the private door opened for you;
enter and come up."

The private door, which was just under the princess's apartment, was
soon opened, and Aladdin conducted up into the chamber. It is impossible
to express the joy of both at seeing each other, after so cruel a
separation. After embracing and shedding tears of joy, they sat down,
and Aladdin said, "I beg of you, princess, to tell me what is become of
an old lamp which stood upon a shelf in my robing-chamber."

"Alas!" answered the princess, "I was afraid our misfortune might be
owing to that lamp; and what grieves me most is, that I have been the
cause of it. I was foolish enough to change the old lamp for a new one,
and the next morning I found myself in this unknown country, which I am
told is Africa."

"Princess," said Aladdin, interrupting her, "you have explained all by
telling me we are in Africa I desire you only to tell me if you know
where the old lamp now is." "The African magician carries it carefully
wrapt up in his bosom," said the princess; "and this I can assure you,
because he pulled it out before me, and showed it to me in triumph."

"Princess," said Aladdin, "I think I have found the means to deliver you
and to regain possession of the lamp, on which all my prosperity
depends; to execute this design it is necessary for me to go to the
town. I shall return by noon, and will then tell you what must be done
by you to insure success. In the mean time, I shall disguise myself, and
beg that the private door may be opened at the first knock."

When Aladdin was out of the palace, he looked round him on all sides,
and perceiving a peasant going into the country, hastened after him; and
when he had overtaken him, made a proposal to him to change clothes,
which the man agreed to. When they had made the exchange, the countryman
went about his business, and Aladdin entered the neighbouring city.
After traversing several streets, he came to that part of the town where
the merchants and artisans had their particular streets according to
their trades. He went into that of the druggists; and entering one of
the largest and best furnished shops, asked the druggist if he had a
certain powder, which he named.

The druggist, judging Aladdin by his habit to be very poor, told him he
had it, but that it was very dear; upon which Aladdin, penetrating his
thoughts, pulled out his purse, and showing him some gold, asked for
half a dram of the powder; which the druggist weighed and gave him,
telling him the price was a piece of gold. Aladdin put the money into
his hand, and hastened to the palace, which he entered at once by the
private door. When he came into the princess's apartments, he said to
her, "Princess, you must take your part in the scheme which I propose
for our deliverance. You must overcome your aversion to the magician,
and assume a most friendly manner toward him, and ask him to oblige you
by partaking of an entertainment in your apartments. Before he leaves,
ask him to exchange cups with you, which he, gratified at the honour you
do him, will gladly do, when you must give him the cup containing this
powder. On drinking it he will instantly fall asleep, and we will obtain
the lamp, whose slaves will do all our bidding, and restore us and the
palace to the capital of China."

The princess obeyed to the utmost her husband's instructions. She
assumed a look of pleasure on the next visit of the magician, and asked
him to an entertainment, which he most willingly accepted. At the close
of the evening, during which the princess had tried all she could to
please him, she asked him to exchange cups with her, and giving the
signal, had the drugged cup brought to her, which she gave to the
magician. He drank it out of compliment to the princess to the very last
drop, when he fell backward lifeless on the sofa.

The princess, in anticipation of the success of her scheme, had so
placed her women from the great hall to the foot of the staircase, that
the word was no sooner given that the African magician was fallen
backward, than the door was opened, and Aladdin admitted to the hall.
The princess rose from her seat, and ran, overjoyed, to embrace him; but
he stopped her, and said, "Princess, retire to your apartment; and let
me be left alone, while I endeavour to transport you back to China as
speedily as you were brought from thence."

When the princess, her women, and slaves were gone out of the hall,
Aladdin shut the door, and going directly to the dead body of the
magician, opened his vest, took out the lamp which was carefully wrapped
up, and rubbing it, the genie immediately appeared. "Genie," said
Aladdin, "I command thee to transport this palace instantly to the place
from whence it was brought hither." The genie bowed his head in token of
obedience, and disappeared. Immediately the palace was transported into
China, and its removal was only felt by two little shocks, the one when
it was lifted up, the other when it was set down, and both in a very
short interval of time.

On the morning after the restoration of Aladdin's palace, the sultan was
looking out of his window, and mourning over the fate of his daughter,
when he thought that he saw the vacancy created by the disappearance of
the palace to be again filled up.

On looking more attentively, he was convinced beyond the power of doubt
that it was his son-in-law's palace. Joy and gladness succeeded to
sorrow and grief. He at once ordered a horse to be saddled, which he
mounted that instant, thinking he could not make haste enough to the
place.

Aladdin rose that morning by daybreak, put on one of the most
magnificent habits his wardrobe afforded, and went up into the hall of
twenty-four windows, from whence he perceived the sultan approaching,
and received him at the foot of the great staircase, helping him to
dismount.

He led the sultan into the princess's apartment. The happy father
embraced her with tears of joy; and the princess, on her side, afforded
similar testimonies of her extreme pleasure. After a short interval,
devoted to mutual explanations of all that had happened, the sultan
restored Aladdin to his favour, and expressed his regret for the
apparent harshness with which he had treated him. "My son," said he, "be
not displeased at my proceedings against you; they arose from my
paternal love, and therefore you ought to forgive the excesses to which
it hurried me." "Sire," replied Aladdin, "I have not the least reason to
complain of your conduct, since you did nothing but what your duty
required. This infamous magician, the basest of men, was the sole cause
of my misfortune."

The African magician, who was thus twice foiled in his endeavour to ruin
Aladdin, had a younger brother, who was as skilful a magician as
himself, and exceeded him in wickedness and hatred of mankind. By mutual
agreement they communicated with each other once a year, however widely
separate might be their place of residence from each other. The younger
brother not having received as usual his annual communication, prepared
to take a horoscope and ascertain his brother's proceedings. He, as well
as his brother, always carried a geomantic square instrument about him;
he prepared the sand, cast the points, and drew the figures. On
examining the planetary crystal, he found that his brother was no longer
living, but had been poisoned; and by another observation, that he was
in the capital of the kingdom of China; also, that the person who had
poisoned him was of mean birth, though married to a princess, a sultan's
daughter.

When the magician had informed himself of his brother's fate, he
resolved immediately to revenge his death, and at once departed for
China; where, after crossing plains, rivers, mountains, deserts, and a
long tract of country without delay, he arrived after incredible
fatigues. When he came to the capital of China, he took a lodging at a
khan. His magic art soon revealed to him that Aladdin was the person who
had been the cause of the death of his brother. He had heard, too, all
the persons of repute in the city talking of a woman called Fatima, who
was retired from the world, and of the miracles she wrought. As he
fancied that this woman might be serviceable to him in the project he
had conceived, he made more minute inquiries, and requested to be
informed more particularly who that holy woman was, and what sort of
miracles she performed.

"What!" said the person whom he addressed, "have you never seen or heard
of her? She is the admiration of the whole town, for her fasting, her
austerities, and her exemplary life. Except Mondays and Fridays, she
never stirs out of her little cell; and on those days on which she comes
into the town she does an infinite deal of good; for there is not a
person who is diseased but she puts her hand on them and cures them."

Having ascertained the place where the hermitage of this holy woman was,
the magician went at night, and, plunging a poniard into her heart,
killed this good woman. In the morning he dyed his face of the same hue
as hers, and arraying himself in her garb, taking her veil, the large
necklace she wore round her waist, and her stick, went straight to the
palace of Aladdin.